                                                                                                                                                                            R-10-48




                              Bedrock Kd data and uncertainty assessment for application in SR-Site geosphere transport calculations
                                                                                                                                       Bedrock Kd data and uncertainty
                                                                                                                                       assessment for application in
                                                                                                                                       SR-Site geosphere transport
                                                                                                                                       calculations

                                                                                                                                       James Crawford, Kemakta Konsult AB



                                                                                                                                       December 2010




                                                                                                                                                                            Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB
                                                                                                                                                                            Swedish Nuclear Fuel
                                                                                                                                                                            and Waste Management Co
                                                                                                                                                                            Box 250, SE-101 24 Stockholm
                                                                                                                                                                            Phone +46 8 459 84 00




CM Gruppen AB, Bromma, 2010
                                         R-10-48
                                                                 ISSN 1402-3091
                                                               Tänd ett lager:
                                                                 SKB R-10-48
                                                               P, R eller TR.




Bedrock Kd data and uncertainty
assessment for application in
SR-Site geosphere transport
calculations

James Crawford, Kemakta Konsult AB



December 2010




This report concerns a study which was conducted for SKB. The conclusions
and viewpoints presented in the report are those of the author. SKB may draw
modified conclusions, based on additional literature sources and/or expert opinions.

A pdf version of this document can be downloaded from www.skb.se 2011-10.
Summary

The safety assessment SR-Site is undertaken to assess the safety of a potential geologic repository
for spent nuclear fuel at the Forsmark and Laxemar sites. The present report is one of several reports
that form the data input to SR-Site and contains a compilation of recommended Kd data (i.e. linear
partitioning coefficients) for safety assessment modelling of geosphere radionuclide transport. The
data are derived for rock types and groundwater compositions distinctive of the site investigation
areas at Forsmark and Laxemar.
Data have been derived for all elements and redox states considered of importance for far-field dose
estimates as described in /SKB 2010d/. The Kd data are given in the form of lognormal distributions
characterised by a mean (μ) and standard deviation (σ). Upper and lower limits for the uncertainty
range of the recommended data are defined by the 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles of the empirical data
sets. The best estimate Kd value for use in deterministic calculations is given as the median of the Kd
distribution.




R-10-48                                                                                               3
Sammanfattning

Säkerhetsanalysen SR-Site genomförs för att bedöma den långsiktiga säkerheten av ett geologiskt
slutförvar för använt kärnbränsle vid Forsmark. Denna rapport är en del i en serie som levererar speci-
fika data till säkerhetsredovisningen SR-Site och innehåller en sammanställning av rekommenderade
Kd data (linjära fördelningskoefficienter) för modellering av radionuklidtransport i geosfären. De
framtagna data är representativa för bergarter och grundvattensammansättningar typiska för plats­
undersökningsområdena vid Forsmark och Laxemar.
Data har framtagits för alla grundämnen och redoxtillstånd som anses vara viktiga för dosberäk­
ningar i fjärrområdet och som beskrivs i /SKB 2010d/. Fördelningskoefficienterna anges i form av
lognormal­fördelade osäkerhetsintervall som karakteriseras av ett medelvärde (μ) och standard­
avvikelse (σ). Övre och undre gränser för osäkerhetsintervallen har definierats som 2.5 % respektive
97.5 % percentilerna av de empiriska dataseten. Det centrala värdet för deterministiska modellerings-
ändamål anges som medianvärdet av Kd-fördelningen.




4                                                                                              R-10-48
Contents

1     Introduction                                                                  7
1.1   Background                                                                    7
1.2   Scope and objectives                                                          7
2     Sorption processes in bedrock                                                  9
2.1   Processes and parameters influencing sorption properties                      10
      2.1.1 Mineral surfaces and their reactive chemistry                           10
      2.1.2 Microstructural properties of rocks and minerals that influence
              sorptivity                                                            11
      2.1.3 Quantification of sorptive surface area and cation exchange capacity    15
      2.1.4 Aqueous phase chemistry and physicochemical conditions                  16
2.2   Overview of sorption modelling approaches                                     23
      2.2.1 Isotherm based methods                                                  23
      2.2.2 Mechanistic models of sorption                                          27
2.3   Safety assessment modelling                                                   36
      2.3.1 Overview of modelling approach                                          36
      2.3.2 Justification for the assumption of a linear sorption process           38
2.4   Parameter variability and uncertainty                                         40
      2.4.1 Conceptual uncertainty concerning the Kd modelling approach             40
      2.4.2 Spatial variability and uncertainty                                     41
      2.4.3 Temporal variability and uncertainty                                    42
3     Description of prioritised radionuclides                                      45
3.1   Radionuclides of importance for SR-Site                                       45
3.2   Data sources and correlations                                                 46
      3.2.1 Overview of geochemical analogies and periodic trends                   48
      3.2.2 Particular geochemical analogues used in this compilation               51
      3.2.3 Overview of available site specific data                                52
      3.2.4 Overview of literature data                                             53
4     Conditions for which data are supplied                                        55
4.1   Physical state of the bedrock                                                 55
4.2   Hydrogeochemistry under application conditions                                56
      4.2.1 Overview of a glacial cycle                                             56
      4.2.2 Issues of importance for assignment of conditional Kd values            59
5     Quantification of data and uncertainties                                      61
5.1   Procedures for extrapolation of data and quantification of uncertainty        61
      5.1.1 Overview of transfer factor approach for sorption property correction   62
      5.1.2 Possible biases in the quantification of radionuclide retention         77
5.2   Sorption data for specific radionuclides of interest                          79
      5.2.1 Americium (Am) and other trivalent actinides and lanthanides            79
      5.2.2 Cadmium (Cd)                                                            80
      5.2.3 Carbon-14 (14C)                                                         80
      5.2.4 Cesium (Cs)                                                             81
      5.2.5 Chlorine (Cl)                                                           82
      5.2.6 Lead (Pb)                                                               82
      5.2.7 Molybdenum (Mo)                                                         83
      5.2.8 Neptunium (Np)                                                          83
      5.2.9 Nickel (Ni)                                                             85
      5.2.10 Niobium (Nb)                                                           86
      5.2.11 Palladium (Pd)                                                         86
      5.2.12 Plutonium (Pu)                                                         87
      5.2.13 Protactinium (Pa)                                                      89
      5.2.14 Radium (Ra)                                                            89
      5.2.15 Selenium (Se)                                                          91



R-10-48                                                                                  5
      5.2.16   Silver (Ag)                                                     91
      5.2.17   Strontium (Sr)                                                  92
      5.2.18   Technetium (Tc)                                                 93
      5.2.19   Thorium (Th)                                                    94
      5.2.20   Tin (Sn)                                                        94
      5.2.21   Tritium (3H)                                                    95
      5.2.22   Uranium (U)                                                     95
      5.2.23   Zirconium (Zr)                                                  97
6     Summary of recommended data for use in SR-Site                           99
6.1   Recommended Kd data for Forsmark                                        100
6.2   Recommended Kd data for Laxemar                                         101
6.3   Comparison with the previous data compilation                           102
6.4   Comparison with data from the LTDE-SD project                           105
6.5   Partial validation using natural tracer data                            107
7     References                                                              109
Appendix A Estimation of groundwater trace constituent concentrations for
           ion-exchange modelling                                             121
Appendix B Corroboration of recommended Kd values for radium using
           natural tracer data                                                127
Appendix C Handling of literature data uncertainties                          139
Appendix D Kd data derivation sheet for trivalent actinides and lanthanides   147
Appendix E Kd data derivation sheet for cesium (Cs)                           153
Appendix F Kd data derivation sheet for lead (Pb)                             161
Appendix G Kd data derivation sheet for neptunium (Np)                        163
Appendix H Kd data derivation sheet for nickel (Ni)                           173
Appendix I     Kd data derivation sheet for niobium (Nb)                      181
Appendix J     Kd data derivation sheet for palladium (Pd)                    185
Appendix K Kd data derivation sheet for plutonium (Pu)                        187
Appendix L Kd data derivation sheet for protactinium (Pa)                     197
Appendix M Kd data derivation sheet for radium (Ra)                           201
Appendix N Kd data derivation sheet for selenium (Se)                         211
Appendix O Kd data derivation sheet for Tin (Sn)                              215
Appendix P Kd data derivation sheet for strontium (Sr)                        219
Appendix Q Kd data derivation sheet for technetium (Tc)                       227
Appendix R Kd data derivation sheet for uranium (U)                           233
Appendix S Kd data derivation sheet for zirconium (Zr)                        241




6                                                                                   R-10-48
1         Introduction

This report contains a compilation of sorption partitioning (Kd) data recommended for use in the SR-Site
safety assessment for the purpose of making radionuclide transport calculations in the geosphere. The
Kd data are given as a central best estimate and an uncertainty range. These are intended to be used in
deterministic and probabilistic simulations of radionuclide transport in the far-field of the repository
environment. The data specifically concern adsorptive retention processes on granitic rocks native to the
Forsmark and Laxemar sites. The data contained herein represent a mix of site specific data obtained
during the site investigations at Forsmark and Laxemar and data obtained from literature sources.



1.1       Background
SKB, the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Co. is currently preparing a licence application
to locate, build and operate a deep repository for spent nuclear fuel. The safety assessment SR-Site forms
an integral part of this licence application. In the safety assessment, geosphere transport calculations
are made to assess levels of radiological risk associated with different scenarios of repository evolution.
Matrix diffusion coupled with sorption is the main retardation mechanism considered in the geosphere
transport calculations.



1.2       Scope and objectives
The term sorption is a very broad concept that describes a number of processes by which dissolved
solutes are sorbed (adsorbed or absorbed) on, or in another substance, e.g. /IUPAC 1997/, which can
also be taken to include processes such as surface precipitation and solid solution formation. In the
context of radionuclide transport and the sense in which the term is used in this report, sorption
is used strictly to refer to adsorptive interaction with mineral surfaces by way of electrostatic and
covalent chemical bonding and specifically excludes other related processes.
The Swedish concept for disposal of high-level nuclear waste involves isolation of the waste at depth in
crystalline bedrock. For this reason, the focus of the present report is sorption processes that may influ-
ence the transport of radionuclides within fractured granitic rock-types. In this definition we loosely
include the entire family of intrusive (plutonic) igneous rocks common in Sweden. For the purposes
of SR-Site, Kd data are derived for sorption on site specific rock types native to the Forsmark and
Laxemar area. For the Forsmark site, the metagranite rock type (Granite to granodiorite, metamorphic,
medium-grained, SKB rock code 101057) is of principal interest on account of its predominance in the
central area of the proposed repository volume /SKB 2010b/. For the Laxemar site, the principal rock
type is considered to be a quartz monzodiorite (Granite to quartz monzodiorite, generally porphyritic,
SKB rock code 501044) /Crawford and Sidborn 2009/. In this report these rocks are referred to as the
reference rock types for each respective site.
This report constitutes an update to the Kd data compilation used in the previous SKB safety assessment,
SR-Can /SKB 2006/ concerning storage of spent nuclear fuel in a deep geological repository environment.
The Kd values given for various radionuclides are used as input parameters to the safety assessment codes
FARF31 /Elert et al. 2004/ and MARFA /Painter and Mancillas 2009/ that calculate far-field radionuclide
release rates. The representation of sorption phenomena using a Kd approach implies a number of assump-
tions that are not always fully defensible if the aim is to accurately represent the dynamics of radionuclide
transport. In this report, recommendations are provided that are cautiously chosen with regard to the
particular transport scenarios being modelled to avoid underestimation of radiological risks. The use of
these Kd values in safety assessment codes therefore does not provide a true representation of the transport
mechanisms as they might actually occur.




R-10-48                                                                                                    7
2         Sorption processes in bedrock

Migrating radionuclides are frequently in the form of aqueous ionic species and will tend to sorb on
mineral surfaces that possess a net charge of opposite sign. Such interactions are well described in
the scientific literature /e.g. Stumm and Morgan 1996/ and the most important mechanisms for this
interaction are considered to be ion-exchange and surface complexation. Ion exchange involves a
purely electrostatic adsorption process whereas surface complexation typically involves covalent
bonding to chemically reactive surface groups on mineral surfaces. The description of surface com-
plexation, however, is complicated by the fact that one frequently speaks of inner sphere and outer
sphere surface complexes. While inner sphere surface complexes involve covalent bonds to surface
reactive groups, outer sphere complexation is more electrostatic in nature and is essentially identical
to ion exchange (this distinction is discussed in more detail in Section 2.2.2).
Sorption can take place directly on the outer surfaces of flow-bearing fractures, or on grain boundary
surfaces and microfractures within the rock matrix where the porewater is effectively stagnant.
Sorption can also take place on other materials, such as secondary clay minerals in fracture surface
coatings. Generally, sorption processes result in the retardation of radionuclide transport along a
flowpath, although when radionuclides sorb on mobile solid materials such as colloids, the effective-
ness of the retardation may decrease (there are even some indications of possible migration enhance-
ment in field-scale tracer experiments performed at the Grimsel Test Site /Kurosawa et al. 2006/).
When dissolved radionuclides are sorbed on naturally occurring mobile colloidal solids, the resulting
particles are commonly referred to as pseudo-colloids. Pseudo-colloid formation involving bentonite
colloids is the subject of a separate data report in the SR-Site project /Wold 2009/ and is considered
in the safety assessment calculations described in the Radionuclide transport report /SKB 2010d/.
Certain radionuclides that are strongly hydrolysed in water and have low solubilities may spontane-
ously form hydroxide microprecipitates or polymeric forms that are referred to as eigencolloids (i.e.
pure phase colloids). Redox sensitive solutes with large differences in solubility between oxidised
and reduced forms are particularly inclined to form eigencolloids when redox conditions change
significantly over short distances such as might occur at a redox front. These processes are not con-
sidered relevant for the SR-Site safety assessment and are therefore not modelled in the radionuclide
transport calculations. This is predicated partly on the basis that sharp redox fronts are not expected in
the repository environment and partly due to the expected ultrafiltration of eigencolloids in the intact
bentonite backfill. Further reasoning in support of this assessment can be found in /SKB 2010c/.
There are other processes apart from sorption, such as precipitation and co-precipitation (solid solu-
tion formation), which can give rise to additional retardation effects for transported radionuclides.
Owing to the difficulties in adequately quantifying and modelling these processes, however, they
are not usually considered to contribute significantly to retardation in safety assessments. In reality,
however, it is very likely that they exert a very strong retardation effect on migrating radionuclides.
The following sections give a brief overview of the different processes and parameters that influence
sorption properties as well as how sorption is modelled. In Section 2.2.2, the simplified modelling
approach used in safety assessment is presented and the various advantages and limitations of the
approach are discussed. This chapter is not intended to give a textbook description on all relevant
aspects of sorption processes and modelling thereof. The main focus is to highlight the central ideas
that are currently used to gain insights into the fundamental physics and chemical mechanisms of
sorption for the purpose of predicting radionuclide migration in fractured rocks. Processes that are of
interest for the SR-Site safety assessment are specifically emphasised, while other processes that are
of considered of less relevance are not dealt with in detail.




R-10-48                                                                                                    9
2.1      Processes and parameters influencing sorption properties
2.1.1 Mineral surfaces and their reactive chemistry
Being a surface mediated process, sorption of radionuclides on rock is sensitive to both the available
surface area of sorbing constituent minerals as well as their geochemical properties. Most minerals
have a net overall negative charge associated with surfaces at the mineral-water interface at normal
groundwater pH levels. This charge is described as having a permanent component that is pH-
invariant and a variable component that varies with the pH of the aqueous phase.
The variable component of the surface charge generally arises due to protonation-deprotonation reac-
tions at the mineral surface, where oxide and hydroxide groups are in contact with water. These are
examples of surface complexation reactions. For aluminosilicate clay minerals the charge develops
partly due to the above, but also due to the permanent charge at the mineral surface. Permanent charge
arises due to so-called isomorphic substitutions in the crystal structure itself where one element is
substituted for another of similar ionic radius (usually not more than about ±15%) during mineral
formation without alteration of the overall crystal structure. Generally, Al3+ is substituted for Si4+
in tetrahedrally coordinated crystal structures and Mg2+, Fe2+, or Fe3+ replacing Al3+ in octahedrally
coordinated structures thereby giving rise to a net structural negative charge (see Section 2.1.2).
Permanent surface charge, however, can also appear by way of imperfections or defects in the lattice
structure of crystals although this is usually a minor contributor.
For many oxide, hydroxide, and aluminosilicate minerals the protonation and deprotonation of sur-
face oxide and hydroxyl groups gives rise to charged surface functional groups that are responsible
for much of the pH-dependent surface charge behaviour of these minerals in environmental systems.
These reactions buffer solution pH depending on the numbers and types of surface groups present.
It is also possible for charged surface groups to bind aqueous ionic species in various ways (e.g.
monodentate- and bidentate complexes, etc.). The chemically reactive functional groups on mineral
surfaces are frequently referred to as sorption sites or binding sites for surface complexation.
Isomorphic substitutions are particularly important in the case of aluminosilicate minerals possessing
a phyllosilicate, or sheet crystal structure (i.e. clay and mica minerals) owing to their large internal
surface area in the form of interlayer planes. This is the main source of surface charge in these min-
erals since the interlayer planes generally have low chemical reactivity. At disruptions and broken
edges of these minerals, however, there are so-called frayed edge sites (FES) which can participate
in surface complexation reactions and give rise to a pH dependent charge.
When considering the ability of mineral surfaces to influence solution chemistry, it is customary to
refer to the cation exchange capacity, or CEC of the mineral. The CEC is the quantity of cations that a
mineral can accommodate on its negatively charged surface. It is usually expressed in terms of charge
equivalents per unit mass (most frequently in the units cmol/kg or the equivalent measure meq/100 g).
A charge equivalent is equal to one mole of ionic charge, or 6.02×1023 ion-exchange sites. The CEC,
being measure of negative charge, is therefore comprised of a variable and permanent charge compo-
nent as outlined above. Although one might seek to differentiate surface complexation binding sites
in mechanistic modelling, it should be noted that the CEC implicitly includes the negatively charged
surface complexation binding sites in the operative definition of an ion-exchange site.
As outlined above, the speciation of reactive surface groups changes with pH owing to protonation-
deprotonation reactions. At low pH values, there may be a net positive surface charge owing to a
predominance of positively charged groups. At high pH, the opposite may be true and the surface
has a net negative charge owing to a predominance of negatively charged surface species. At some
pH, the mineral surface may change from a net positive to a net negative surface charge owing to
the balance of charge arising due to adsorption of H+ or OH–, the permanent charge component, and
that of adsorbed electrolyte ions. This is referred to as the point of zero charge, PZC (or pHPZC). To
a good approximation, the PZC is roughly inferred from the pH at which electrophoretic mobility
of a mineral particle vanishes, the so-called isoelectric point, or IEP /Sposito 1998/. To distinguish
between the contributions of H+/OH– adsorption and the additional effect of permanent charge and
adsorbed electrolyte ions, the term point of zero net proton charge, PZNPC (or pHPZNPC) is also
frequently used. This is also the pH at which a mineral tends to buffer pH in a pure water solution.
Although beyond the scope of this report, this short discussion should make the reader aware that
the definition of pHPZC is subject to various complicating factors giving rise to a number of different
operational and theoretical definitions in the literature.


10                                                                                              R-10-48
Generally speaking, the pHPZNPC of silica and aluminosilicate minerals tends to be below pH 4. For
aluminium and iron oxides or hydroxides, on the other hand, the pHPZNPC is above pH 7. It should
also be noted that the pHPZNPC does not imply that there are no charged surface species existing at
this pH, but rather that there are equal amounts of positive and negatively charged surface groups
giving rise to a net zero overall charge. For this reason, igneous rocks are classified as being acidic
or basic depending upon their relative silica contents and the surface reactive behaviour that this
implies. Felsic rocks such as granite and granodiorite are termed acidic owing to their high silica
contents, while Mafic and Ultramafic rocks are basic owing to their low relative silica contents.
Under normal groundwater conditions, rocks that are termed acidic have a poor pH-buffering capac-
ity when undergoing dissolution, whereas basic rocks are relatively better at pH buffering.
The surface chemistry of calcite is more complex than the abovementioned minerals on account of
the fact that H+ and OH– do not influence the surface charging behaviour in the same fashion and the
concept of a well-defined pHPZNPC or pHPZC therefore appears to lack physical meaning /Stipp 1999/.
Although pH does play a role in the charging behaviour of calcite surfaces it is widely regarded
that this occurs primarily by way of altering the speciation of the carbonate ion in solution and the
charge determining ions are actually Ca2+ and CO32– /Madsen 2006/. Although the pHPZNPC does not
strictly exist for calcite, its isoelectric point (and related ξ-potential) occurs when the activity of free
Ca2+ and CO32– are equal /Stipp et al. 1998, Madsen 2006/. In the case of calcite it is therefore more
appropriate to discuss surface charging behaviour in terms of the pCaPZC or pCO3 PZC. Although
sorptive interaction with calcite may be an important mechanism for retention of radionuclides in
fracture coatings and a possible confounding factor in sorption experiments where co-precipitation
might occur, it is of less relevance for matrix retention processes since calcite is not thought to exist
in significant quantities in the rock matrix. Treatment of sorption processes involving calcite is
beyond the scope of this report although scoping calculations are made in the SR-Site Radionculide
transport report /SKB 2010d/ to quantify the possible impact of calcite solid solutions on radionuclide
transport retardation.
The fact that certain minerals such as ferric oxyhydroxides and hematite have isoelectric points close
to groundwater pH is of considerable significance especially for radionuclides in oxyanion form
since these are most likely to form surface complexes with positively charged surface groups. If
the pH is below the pHPZNPC this implies the possibility of increased sorption of oxyanions on these
minerals. If, on the other hand, the pH is above the pHPZNPC then the sorption of oxyanions will be
much reduced owing to the predominance of negatively charged surface groups. The opposite behav-
iour can, of course, be expected for radionuclides in cationic form. Most aluminosilicate minerals,
however, are predominantly negatively charged for all reasonable groundwater pH levels.


2.1.2 Microstructural properties of rocks and minerals that influence sorptivity
A factor of some importance when considering the reactive properties of rock is the extent to which
the constituent minerals have been altered, weathered, or otherwise physically disrupted compared to
pristine crystal structures. This is particularly important at the edges of individual crystal grains and
at locations that have been disrupted by weathering and grain attrition processes. At these sites there
may be reactive surface groups that differ in abundance and reactivity as compared to pristine crystal
surfaces. When rock is crushed in order to perform laboratory measurements, new mineral surfaces
are created. Different minerals also have different failure modes and the distribution of surface
area and sorption sites amongst constituent minerals in the crushed material may not necessarily
be representative of undisturbed rock in situ. It is therefore useful to consider the properties of the
constituent minerals and how these can be expected to contribute to the overall sorptive properties of
the rock when attempting to relate measurements made on rocks in different states of disaggregation
and possibly from different sites with different geochemical properties.
The surface area of framework silicate minerals may consist of external crystal surfaces as well as
intracrystalline microfractures forming internal surfaces. Generally, however, there is little difference
between the internal and external surfaces in terms of their chemical reactivity. Even though they
comprise the overwhelming bulk of mineral phases in granitic rocks, most commonly occurring
framework silicate minerals tend to be neglected when considering sorption processes owing to
their low reactivity when compared to the phyllosilicate minerals. In terrestrial environments, their
sorption properties tend to be overwhelmed by the presence of phyllosilicate minerals and ferric and


R-10-48                                                                                                  11
aluminium oxyhydroxides. Additionally, their surface charge and sorption capacity arises largely
due to ionisable surface groups, as isomorphic substitution effects are mostly absent, or at least not a
regular and predictable feature of their structure.
Phyllosilicate minerals are layered, consisting of continuous sheets of tetrahedrally coordinated
silica (SiO2) interspersed with sheets of octahedral, gibbsite- (Al(OH)3) or brucite-like (Mg(OH)2)
crystal structures. Although these minerals have a relatively complicated configuration, their basic
structure can be readily explained in terms of Pauling coordination polyhedra /Pauling 1929/. The
specific details of this is not important for the present discussion although it is crucial to note that the
tetrahedral (T) and octahedral (O) sheets in clay minerals are stacked in layers that may be separated
by water molecules or exchangeable cations that balance the permanent charge in the crystal lattice.
These minerals are further categorised according to whether they have two-layer (TO), or three-layer
(TOT) repeating structures. The simplest TO clay mineral is kaolinite, consisting of alternating
layers of tetrahedral silica and octahedral gibbsite. Kaolinite has no exchangeable cations or water
molecules in the interlayer space and is therefore relatively chemically inert compared with many
other clay minerals. The distance between the basal plane of the silica T-sheet and the next layer is
7Å including interlayer spacing. The silica-gibbsite TO layers are held together strongly by hydrogen
bonds which results in kaolinite being a non-expanding clay.
The TOT clays consist of a gibbsite- or brucite O-layer sandwiched between two silica T-layers. The
mineral muscovite, although considered as a primary accessory mineral in granitic rock, can also form
by later alteration of orthoclase or plagioclase feldspar. It is considered to be a mica mineral along
with biotite, although it shares many similarities with the illite family of clay minerals. In micas,
about one in four of the Si4+ ions are isomorphically substituted with Al3+ in the silica T-layers. This
results in a deficiency of positive charge in the sheets that is permanent in the crystal structure and not
influenced by solution pH. To balance the excess negative charge, K+ ions are held in the interlayer
by strong electrostatic forces. The basal plane spacing of the micas is on the order of 10Å and the
small K+ ions are difficult to exchange with larger, usually hydrated, ions owing to the narrow spacing
between the layers. The narrow spacing and the presence of tightly held cations excludes the penetra-
tion of water molecules in the interlayer, and these minerals are therefore non-expanding.
Illite balances excess negative charge by an interlayer of K+ ions and, like muscovite, has a basal
plane spacing of 10Å. Illite, however, is often rather poorly defined owing to its propensity to form
mixed-layer clays with smectite minerals. Other cations such as Ca2+ or Mg2+ can also sometimes
substitute for K+ in the interlayer. The smectites (see Figure 2-1) frequently have isomorphic substitu-
tions of Mg2+ or Fe2+ in place of Al3+ in the gibbsite/brucite O-layers and Al3+ or Fe3+ instead of Si4+ in
the silica T-layers. The smectites are swelling clays, the best example of which is Na-montmorillonite,
otherwise known as bentonite. Water molecules and exchangeable cations are present in the interlayer
spacing, which varies between 12–18 Å depending upon the solution composition and the identity of
the interlayer cations (Na+ ions allow greater expansion than either Ca2+ or Mg2+).
The chlorite group of clay minerals are similar to the micas although instead of an interlayer of K+
ions, the interlayer contains a brucite-like, structure that contains Mg2+, Al3+, or Fe3+ coordinated with
OH– groups. A significant difference between the O-layers in chlorite and the brucite-like interlayer
structure is that the interlayer structure is only electrostatically bonded to the adjacent layers, whereas
there is covalent bonding between the O and T-structures in the TOT layers. The basal plane spacing
of chlorites is roughly 14Å. The chlorites are frequently formed as alteration products of biotite. The
substitution of Mg2+ with Al3+ in the brucite-like interlayers of chlorite gives a positive structural charge
that counterbalances most of the permanent charge of the T-layers. The CEC of chlorite therefore is
significantly less than biotite on account of both the pre-existing charge counterbalance as well as the
interlayer structure blocking access for the exchange of cations /Sparks 2003/.
The external surface area of phyllosilicate minerals is in the form of sheet edges as well as the externally
exposed basal planes. The basal planes of sheet silicates that are externally exposed may be composed of
silica or, in the case of kaolinite, gibbsite layers. The internal surface area is comprised of the interlayers
of stacked sheets containing exchangeable cations. Disruptions in the form of microfractures and
partially delaminated sheets also occur in these minerals although the surface area contribution of these
features is usually insignificant in comparison with the interlayer surface area.




12                                                                                                     R-10-48
                                            a)                                         b)
                                                                                                    Illite / Muscovite

                                                 Kaolinite


                                                                                 Silica

                             Silica                                              Gibbsite

                                                                                 Silica                                         10Å
                             Gibbsite                          7Å

        Hydrogen bonding
        between layers
                                                                     Al+3 isomorphic
                                                                     substitutions
                                                                                                                              Exchangeable K+ ions in
                                                                                                                                     interlayer




                                    c)                                d)                                                 e)
                                            Biotite (Mica)                      Chlorite                                            Smectite / Montmorillonite




                           Silica                                                                                             Silica

                           Brucite                                                                               Gibbsite/Brucite
                           Silica                              10Å                                         14Å                Silica                             12-18Å




Al+3 isomorphic substitutions
in silica sheet
Mg+2 or Fe+2 isomorphic
substitutions in brucite
sheet

                                     Exchangeable K+ ions in
                                                                     Mg2+, Al3+, or Fe3+ brucite-                               Exchangeable Na+, Ca2+, or
                                            interlayer
                                                                       like interlayer sheet                                    Mg2+ ions as well as loosely
                                                                                                                                   held water molecules


Figure 2‑1. Structure of kaolinite (a), illite/muscovite (b), biotite (c), and minerals belonging to the chlorite
(d), and smectite (e) families. All minerals except kaolinite exhibit isomorphic substitutions that result in a
charge imbalance that is offset by ions in the interlayer space. Interlayer cations in chlorite are difficult to
exchange owing to the brucite-like structure of the interlayer space. Smectites (e) expand and contract upon
hydration or dehydration of the interlayer space while the other minerals are non-expanding.


Silica basal planes (termed siloxane surfaces, featuring a repetitive Si-O-Si structure) generally do not
contribute significantly to the pH-variable charge component as the bridging bonds are hydrophobic.
There is, however, permanent charge at these surfaces arising from isomorphic substitution that
will contribute towards the overall CEC of the mineral. At the edges of silica sheets, there may be
silanol functional groups (Si-OH) that are ionisable. Basal gibbsite planes containing Al-substituted
siloxane groups (Al-O-Al) are comparatively more reactive than their true siloxane counterparts and
readily contribute to the CEC. The corresponding aluminol sites (A-OH) at sheet edges, however,
have slightly different reactivity to basal plane Al-substituted siloxane groups and therefore have
measurably different reactivity. Analogous functional groups (Mg-OH) and reactive characteristics
exist for brucite-like sheet edges. Most Phyllosilicate minerals only have siloxane basal plane outer
surfaces as the gibbsite/brucite layers are sequestered between silica sheets. This means that ionisable
surface groups essentially only exist at sheet edges in these minerals. In spite of this, the basal plane
surfaces do have an ion exchange capacity owing to the permanent charge arising due to isomorphic
substitution as well as crystal lattice imperfections.
Although perfectly smooth silica basal planes are characterised by an apparent absence of ionisable
surface groups, the sheet structures frequently contain cracks /Brandt et al. 2003/, dislocation cores
and stacking faults /Noe and Veblen 1999/, as well as other structural defects that can promote
surface reactivity. It is therefore possible for basal planes to have ionisable surface groups at lattice
defects, although to a lesser extent than those present at sheet edges owing to their sparse distribu-
tion. Broken siloxane bonds at crack defects, for example, form silanol groups when hydrated and
thus function in a similar fashion to sheet edge silanol groups. The crack defects are locations where
weathering can occur and in strongly weathered clay minerals there is significant pitting and terrace
etching of the basal planes as they are chemically eroded.



R-10-48                                                                                                                                                            13
As discussed previously, the internal layers of clay minerals also can participate in ion exchange
reactions, thus contributing to the reactivity of these minerals. It should be remembered, however,
that the internal surface area of some minerals can be accessed more- or less readily by different
cations and the measured CEC is not necessarily a measure of the reactive capacity of the mineral.
Cations with very small hydrated radii such as Cs+, for example, may be able to exchange readily
with interlayer K+ ions in biotite and chlorite whereas larger hydrated cations and aqueous com-
plexes may not be able to access the interlayer regions effectively. Small, hydrated cations can also
effectively outcompete cations with larger hydration spheres for edge sites owing to steric effects
/Poinssot et al. 1999/.
There is a large body of evidence to suggest that Cs+ undergoes very strong and selective ion exchange
with interlayer K+ ions in a variety of clay minerals, but most particularly biotite. Although biotite
is a minor accessory of granitic rocks, it is of great relevance for retention properties on account of
its relatively strong sorptivity for many radionuclides. The CEC of Kaolinite exhibits a strong pH
dependence owing to the numerous aluminol sites at externally exposed gibbsite basal planes as well as
aluminol and silanol groups at sheet edges. In the case of illites, smectites, and other TOT clay miner-
als, however, aluminol and silanol groups only exist at the sheet edges and the ion exchange capacity
of the basal planes arises entirely due to permanent charge. As permanent charge comprises a larger
proportion of the total ion exchange capacity, the CEC of TOT clay minerals is consequently much less
sensitive to pH than tectosilicates, oxide, and hydroxide minerals (the CEC of carbonate minerals such
as calcite is difficult to place in the context of pH for the reasons outlined previously in Section 2.1.1).
As far as sorption reactivity is concerned, edge sites are thought to be more reactive than basal plane
sites. Edge sites are numerically fewer than basal plane sites and it is customary to refer to them
generally as high affinity/low capacity sites while basal plane sites are referred to as low affinity/high
capacity sites. It should be noted that this nomenclature is also used to describe different reactive
sites on oxide surfaces, which are invoked to explain Langmuir-like behaviour at low surface cover-
age (more on this later in Section 2.2.2). The relative importance of reactive edge sites increases
with decreasing mineral grain size, as they comprise a higher proportion of the overall grain surface
area. For clay minerals such as kaolinite that have essentially no accessible internal surface area, the
presence of aluminol groups at sheet edges and on external basal planes is very important and their
measured CEC varies strongly as a function of particle size. For illites and mica minerals, on the
other hand, there is some particle size dependence although the high ion-exchange capacity of the
internal layers reduces its overall importance. Cation exchange capacity within the internal layers
of clay minerals, however, is not easily accessed and can lead to slow diffusive uptake kinetics.
Crushing and grinding of clay minerals may also increase the number of reactive sites on external
basal plane surfaces by way of forming new surface cracks.
The framework silicate minerals also contain a variety of lattice imperfections that influence their
sorption reactivity. At crystal surfaces these imperfections can include steps, kinks, isolated growth unit
outcrops, edge vacancies, surface vacancies, and screw dislocations. These defects arise during crystal
growth and are thus an integral feature of mineral structure imprinted already during magmatic dif-
ferentiation of the rock mineral phases. Crushing and grinding of framework silicate minerals can also
create reactive silanol and aluminol groups on external surfaces where chemical bonds are broken. New
reactive surfaces can even be created internally as micro fractures or fissures within individual mineral
grains. Framework silicates tend to fracture along regular surfaces related to weaknesses in the crystal
structure called cleavage planes. Cleavage planes generally coincide with crystal unit cell boundaries,
although they are influenced by imperfections and heterogeneities in the crystal lattice.
Tectonic forces and variations of mineral phase density during formation can exert stresses on crystal
grains that can lead to the formation of internal micro fractures. Quartz, for example undergoes a
volume change upon cooling from 600°C (4–5%) that is significantly larger than other common silicate
minerals (1–2%) it may be associated with in granite /Seo et al. 2002/. These stresses in combination
with variations in crystal strain due to the presence of dislocations can allow individual crystal grains to
develop significant internal microfracturing already during their formation stage. In addition to stress
microfracturing within individual mineral grains, the volume change of various mineral phases upon
cooling can lead to the formation of grain boundary porosity. Depending upon the degree to which this
porosity is interconnected, deuteric- (i.e. fluids present already during formation) and hydrothermal
fluids can access the internal surfaces of the granitic matrix and lead to alteration of the mineral phases.



14                                                                                                  R-10-48
During weathering of granite, biotite is typically altered to chlorite. This can also be accompanied
by the formation of ferric oxide microprecipitates within the rock matrix owing to dissolution of Fe2+
ions from the crystal lattice. Feldspars and other tectosilicates undergo alteration or weathering to
give muscovite and the other clay minerals (illite, smectite, and mixed layer clays). Clay minerals
are generally absent from intact granite, although can form by the more intense weathering processes
occurring adjacent to fracture surfaces, particularly where hydrothermal alteration has occurred.


2.1.3 Quantification of sorptive surface area and cation exchange capacity
Surface areas of geological materials are typically measured using the BET method /Brunauer et al.
1938/ which uses nitrogen or argon gas as a probe molecule to gravimetrically assess the mass of a
monolayer of adsorbed gas molecules. Although a good proxy for assessing relative sorptive surface
areas of pure mineral phases, the correlation between BET surface area and sorptive surface area is
less good for mineral mixtures such as granitic rocks owing to the differing sorption site densities
of the constituent minerals and their reactivity. It is the relative surface areas of these minerals in
contact with the pore water rather than the relative mass or volumetric abundances of the minerals in
the rock that determines the overall macroscopic sorptivity for a given total surface area in contact
with the porewater. In this report and the other reports comprising SR-Site, the term porewater
is used strictly to refer to the water existing in the connected microporosity of the rock. This is a
different definition to that typically used in the hydrogeological literature where it usually refers to
the water in flow bearing fractures.
Although the BET technique is the most widely used method for surface area measurement, it is
less suited to clay minerals owing to the inaccessibility of the interlayer surfaces to the neutral gas
probe molecules. There are related techniques that can be used to estimate the interlayer surface area
of hydratable and expandable clays (e.g. smectite) although in general they still cannot access the
interlayer regions of non-expandable clay minerals such as biotite and illite.
The surface area of tectosilicate minerals is strongly related to particle size and it is not uncommon
for smaller crushed rock size fractions (≤ 0.1 mm) to have surface areas 10–100 times greater than
particles of mm size and above. Phyllosilicate minerals in granitic rock are usually finely divided and
have greater surface areas than the tectosilicates. Typical specific surface areas of phyllosilicate min-
erals range from 1–10 m2/g for biotite and chlorite /Malmström et al. 1996, Zazzi 2009/, 65–100 m2/g
for illite, and can be as much as 600–800 m2/g in the case of smectites such as Na-montmorillonite
/Langmuir 1997/. In largely intact granitic rock, however, biotite and chlorite are the most important
of the phyllosilicate minerals.
There are a number of methods available for determining the CEC of minerals and mineral mixtures.
There are also different meanings and interpretations that can be attached to the measurement results
of these methods depending upon discrepancies between conceptual and operational definitions of
the CEC. The ion exchange capacity can be operationally defined as the quantity of ions that can be
desorbed from a mineral under a given set of experimental conditions (i.e. pH, ionic strength, specia-
tion, solid-liquid ratio, etc.). For cation exchange, this is a measure of a negative surface charge of
the material. Depending upon the experimental conditions that have been chosen for the measure-
ment, this operational definition does not always coincide with strict definitions of ion exchange that
are used in thermodynamic modelling.
The measurement of CEC usually involves the displacement of native, readily exchangeable cations
by a standard cation whose adsorption can be quantified analytically /Stumm and Morgan 1996/.
Many of the older methods use pH buffered contact solutions which may be inappropriate if the pH
of the natural system differs from the pH at which the measurement solution is buffered. Today it is
generally accepted that the pH at which the measurement is carried out should not differ markedly
from the natural pH where sorption is likely to occur in the system in question. Being a sorption
process there is also the problem of correct interpretation of experimental results in the light of
relevant thermodynamic and kinetic processes (principally diffusion kinetics).
A method that is frequently used in soil science owing to its reproducibility and precision is the
BaCl2 compulsive exchange method (ISO 13536). Although accurate, it is a tedious method that
requires multiple steps and wet chemical procedures. This method was used in the Forsmark and
Laxemar site investigations although was ultimately found to be unsuitable for granitic rock samples


R-10-48                                                                                                15
owing to their generally low CEC. A simpler, one step method that allows the simultaneous direct
measurement of both the CEC and exchangeable cations is based upon the silver-thiourea ion
complex (AgTU). After equilibration, the loss of Ag from solution is measured by means of atomic
absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) that also allows the simultaneous measurement of leached
cations. For comparative purposes an estimate of CEC can also be made based upon the sum of
cation equivalents released during the exchange process.
Another frequently used method is based upon isotope dilution where the solid phase is firstly con-
ditioned by replacement of exchangeable cations with a given index cation (typically Na+ or Ca2+)
and then equilibrated with an electrolyte solution of the same cation (NaClO4 or Ca(NO3)2) that
has been labelled with a radiotracer (22Na or 45Ca) /Baeyens and Bradbury 2004/. The method has
the advantage that, being a radiotracer method, it has a high level of sensitivity. A related technique
uses rapid tritium exchange and is essentially a quantitative measure of the numbers of hydrated
functional groups at the mineral surface.
Cation exchange capacities of common granitic minerals are to some extent dependent on particle
size, although more so for tectosilicates since internal surface areas are typically small relative to
external surface areas of crushed particles. The CEC of tectosilicates is not particularly interesting
since it tends to be dominated by variable charge sites and therefore depends on the pH at which it
is measured. The CEC of quartz and K-feldspar, however, has been estimated by /Akiba et al. 1989/
to be roughly in the range 0.1–0.3 cmol/kg for pH in the interval of 6–9. Using isotope dilution
techniques /Allard et al. 1983/ reports CEC ranges of 1–2 cmol/kg for biotite, 5 cmol/kg for chlorite
and 70–80 cmol/kg for smectites in the pH interval from 5–9.


2.1.4 Aqueous phase chemistry and physicochemical conditions
The chemical composition of groundwater and the reactions between aqueous solutes is of great
importance for understanding sorption processes. This influences not only the distribution of radio-
nuclides amongst various aqueous species, but also the ionic strength. Both of these features have
consequences for the distribution of radionuclides between the aqueous and immobile or colloidal
solid phases.
It is important to note that both sorption and solubility equilibria (i.e. precipitation/dissolution)
may govern the free concentration of a solute in a groundwater system by removing or adding it to
the aqueous phase. Here, we use the term solute to denote any dissolved chemical constituent and
the term can therefore refer to the radionuclides themselves or any other substance that one would
normally encounter in dissolved form in groundwater. The free concentration of a solute, however,
makes up a variable part of the total dissolved concentration of a substance. The distribution of a
solute amongst various species is termed the speciation of the solution.


Influence of speciation
When one or more dissolved species react to form a compound where the individual constituents are
held together by chemical bonds rather than by electrostatic forces, the product is termed a complex.
When discussing the complexation reaction of a specific solute, the dissolved specie with which
it reacts is commonly referred to as a ligand. Surface complexation is analogous to aqueous phase
complexation with the exception that one of the ligands takes the form of a reactive functional group
on a mineral surface in the case of surface complexation. The formation of aqueous complexes may
greatly affect the distribution of a radionuclide between the aqueous and solid phases both directly
and indirectly.
Indirect effects of speciation where the formation of an aqueous complex decreases the sorption
and precipitation tendency are commonly important under repository conditions. In many respects,
indirect effects of speciation can be likened to a competition between mobile (aqueous) and immo-
bile (surface) ligands to form complexes with a solute. Other indirect effects may occur where other
groundwater solutes compete with radionuclides to form complexes with dissolved ligands. This is
also analogous to competition amongst groundwater solutes for surface complexation binding sites,
which is an example of a direct competitive effect. Direct effects of speciation where an aqueous
complex has a greater tendency to sorb than the free solute are also known to occur.



16                                                                                               R-10-48
There are a number of different ligands present in groundwater that may influence the speciation
of radionuclides. Chief among these are hydroxyl ions (involved in hydrolysis), carbonate, and to a
lesser extent chloride. Depending on redox conditions, the presence of sulphate or sulphide may also
play a role in radionuclide speciation. The role of redox is discussed later as a separate item owing
to its overwhelming influence on the mobility of certain radionuclides. In near-surface environ-
ments nitrate, small organic acids, fulvic and humic substances, and bacterial siderophores may be
important. These ligands, however, are not considered relevant for sorption processes at repository
depth and are not considered for the geosphere transport processes in SR-Site (for more information
see the SR-Site Geosphere process report /SKB 2010c/).
Two key variables which govern a large portion of radionuclide speciation are the pH and carbonate
concentration (or equivalent partial pressure of carbon dioxide, pCO2). These are considered to be of
primary relevance for many radionuclides, particularly those that sorb by way of a surface complexa-
tion mechanism. To illustrate the complicated interplay between radionuclide speciation, pH, and
carbonate it is instructive to consider americium as an example on account of its relatively simple
chemistry and insensitivity to redox conditions. The principal hydrolysis reactions involving Am(III)
are thought to be:
Am3+ + H2O # AmOH2+ H+							(2-1)
Am3+ + 2H2O # Am(OH)+2 + 2H+ 							(2-2)
Am3+ + 3H2O # Am(OH)3 + 3H+							(2-3)
The relative equilibrium concentrations of Am(III) species can be readily calculated with the aid of
a suitable simulation tool such as PHREEQC for a given total concentration of Am(III) dissolved in
water containing very little dissolved carbonate (10–6 M). The results of this calculation are shown in
Figure 2-2 as a function of pH.
If the water contains significant amounts of dissolved carbonate, this can also act as a ligand to bind
free Am3+ among various dissolved carbonate complexes. The principal carbonate complexes that
can be formed by Am(III) according to the SKB thermodynamic database (henceforth, the SKB-
TDB /Duro et al. 2006/) are:
Am3+ + HCO3– # AmHCO32+ 							(2-4)
Am3+ + HCO3– # AmCO3+ + H+							(2-5)
Am3+ + 2HCO3– # Am(CO3)2– + 2H+			 			(2-6)
Am3+ + 3HCO3– # Am(CO3)33– + 3H+ 						(2-7)
Figure 2-3 shows the effect of a larger fixed total amount of dissolved carbonate (i.e. all free and
complexed forms taken together) on the speciation of Am(III). As can be seen from the figure,
increasing amounts of dissolved carbonate have an increasing dominance on the speciation of
Am(III) at circumneutral pH levels or higher. The binding of Am(III) in carbonate complexes is a
form of indirect competitive effect which can potentially reduce the magnitude of sorption if the
carbonate concentration is sufficiently high.


Influence of ionic strength
The ionic strength of groundwater exerts a number of direct and indirect effects on sorption depending
on the solute concerned and its sorption characteristics. The most obvious ionic strength effect on the
partitioning of radionuclides between the solid and aqueous phase involves direct competition of main
groundwater components (e.g. Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, K+, etc.) for ion exchange and surface complexation
sites. This effect is especially important for ion exchange at permanently charged surface sites. The
indirect influence of ionic strength on homogeneous chemical equilibria is well known and can be
modelled through the use of activity coefficients in equilibrium mass action equations (see e.g. /Stumm
and Morgan 1996/). The activity coefficient is related to the ionic strength I, which is defined as:
     1 n
I=     ∑ ci zi2 									(2-8)
     2 i =1


R-10-48                                                                                                17
            1


           0.9                     Am3+             Am(OH) 2+

                                                                                         Am(OH)3
           0.8


           0.7


           0.6



Fraction
                                               AmOH2+
           0.5


           0.4


           0.3


           0.2
                                      +
                                 AmCO 3

           0.1


            0
                 4        5           6    7            8           9           10       11         12
                                                    pH

 Figure 2‑2. Relative concentration of Am species at equilibrium as a function of pH for a fixed total
 concentration (10–12 M) of dissolved Am(III) and a fixed total concentration (10‑6 M) of dissolved carbonate.
 Calculated with the aid of PHREEQC and the SKB thermodynamic database /Duro et al. 2006/.


            1

                                          AmCO 3+
           0.9                                                          Am(CO3) 2−
                      Am3+

           0.8                                                                         Am(OH)3

           0.7


           0.6



Fraction
                                                                                   +
                                                                         Am(OH) 2
           0.5


           0.4
                     AmHCO 32+

           0.3
                                                                                3−
                                                                        Am(CO3) 3
           0.2


           0.1


            0
                 4       5           6    7         8           9             10       11          12
                                                    pH

 Figure 2‑3. Relative concentration of Am species at equilibrium as a function of pH for a fixed total
 concentration (10‑12 M) of dissolved Am(III) and a fixed total concentration (10‑3 M) of dissolved carbonate.
 Calculated with the aid of PHREEQC and the SKB thermodynamic database assuming a temperature of
 25°C /Duro et al. 2006/.




 18                                                                                                      R-10-48
Where ci is the molar concentration and zi is the charge of ionic species i. The relation between ionic
strength and species activity is established through various empirical and theoretical treatments
(e.g. the Debye-Hückel and Davies equations, as well as ion association, and specific ion interaction
approaches). For a detailed description of these see, e.g. /Grenthe et al. 1997/. Additional ionic
strength dependencies are related to surface charge and electrostatic effects in the case of sorption
reactions. These are discussed further in Section 2.2.2.

Influence of solubility
The partitioning of radionuclides between the aqueous and solid phases exhibits strongly divergent
physical characteristics when the governing processes are precipitation and dissolution rather than sur-
face complexation or ion exchange equilibria. Dissolution and precipitation reactions are, for example,
frequently slower than sorption reactions and also may be kinetically hindered even if thermodynami-
cally feasible. In addition, the free radionuclide concentration is independent of the amount or concentra-
tion of available solid phase when precipitation/dissolution mechanisms are active. Thus, dissolution
and precipitation reactions establish an upper limit on the radionuclide concentration, above which it
is physically meaningless to address retention using a Kd-based approach. Having said this, however,
it should be noted that dissolution and precipitation do not occur to the exclusion of sorption reactions.
Downstream of regions where solubility equilibrium determines the dissolved concentration of a
radionuclide, for example, sorption processes would still be expected to govern the transport retardation.
In a broader perspective, this means that while solubility equilibria may govern the concentration of
a radionuclide at its source and thus the release rate from a compromised storage canister, the far-
field transport retardation is typically mediated by ion-exchange or surface complexation processes.
Solubility can also determine the concentration of solutes that compete for sorption binding sites as
well as the natural background concentrations of naturally occurring isotopes of a given element.
Both of these features are of central importance for establishing relevant conditions for the estima-
tion of conditional Kd values for use in safety assessment calculations.
Under repository conditions, a number of different solid phases, including oxides, hydroxides, car-
bonates, sulphates, and sulphides have been suggested to control radionuclide solubility. In natural
groundwater systems, however, radionuclide concentrations are commonly observed to be lower
than that predicted from the solubility of pure mineral phases (e.g. /Bruno et al. 1995, Curti 1999/).
This is a phenomenon that has been attributed to the formation of co-precipitates (solid solutions),
with lower solubility than the pure phases. While sorption and solubility equilibria are customarily
modelled as distinctively separate processes, it has been suggested that they are part of a mechanistic
continuum, where ions are incorporated at the solid surface.
Figure 2-4 illustrates the concept of a mechanistic continuum of processes spanning the sorption of
a solute merging with surface precipitation and finally pure phase precipitation after a monolayer
coverage of the surface has been achieved (e.g. /Zhu 2002/). There are also experimental indications
that incipient surface precipitation might even occur prior to full monolayer coverage owing to the
formation of polymeric surface complexes of the solute concerned /Katz and Hayes 1995/. The
surface gradually accumulates the trace element, thereby forming a solid-solution like phase.
Similar solid solutions can also form through co-precipitation, where the trace element isomorphi-
cally substitutes for the host metal during precipitation. In both cases, a surface layer is formed
containing the trace metal, which has thermodynamically different properties to the pure solid phase.
Co-precipitation of trace metal ions with calcite, barite, and ferric-oxyhydroxides have been most
frequently suggested in the scientific literature and the theoretical basis under which these processes
are modelled is relatively well-described thermodynamically. Formation of solid solutions can even
occur if the host phase is nominally in equilibrium owing to the dynamic nature of such processes
where forward (precipitation) and reverse (dissolution) reaction rates are exactly balanced. For a
detailed account of these processes see, for example, the state of the art review by the NEA /Bruno
et al. 2007/. More recently, co-precipitation phenomena have been suggested as solubility limiting
phases in the spent fuel storage canisters and therefore of central importance for estimating near-field
release rates. The co-precipitation of radium with barite (BaSO4) is of particular relevance in this
respect owing to its potential contribution to far-field dose rates /Grandia et al. 2008/.




R-10-48                                                                                                 19
                                                  Pure phase precipitate


                        Monolayer surface site density



                                                         linear Kd




Surface concentration

                                                                           Surface precipitation



                                                  Langmuir isotherm




                                                   Pure phase solubility




                                                     log10 [Mv+]

  Figure 2‑4. Illustration of the continuum of surface reactive phenomena (green curve) extending from
  linear sorption (Kd) through, monolayer site saturation (Langmuir isotherm), surface precipitation and
  finally pure phase precipitation (based on /Zhu 2002/).


  Influence of redox conditions
  The redox conditions (as defined by the redox potential, Eh) in the groundwater exert a strong
  influence on radionuclide speciation by way of controlling the predominant valence of radionuclide
  species present. For some radionuclides (e.g. U, Np, Tc, Pu), redox speciation places an important
  control on chemical behaviour and thereby also their sorptive properties. This is particularly true
  for elements that switch between cationic (usually sorbing) and anionic (usually non-sorbing) forms
  upon changing redox state. Technetium which changes between a cationic +IV and an oxyanion +VII
  state falls into this category. Other important controls occur where one of the redox states is more
  readily solubilised or less prone to sorb than the other. Uranium in its oxidised +VI form, for exam-
  ple, is much more soluble than the reduced +IV form, a property that leads to roll-front formation in
  naturally occurring uranium mineralisations which are frequently invoked as natural analogues of
  repositories for spent nuclear fuel (e.g. /Miller et al. 2000).
  The redox state of deep granitic groundwater is largely determined by the presence of redox control-
  ling pairs such as Fe3+/Fe2+ and SO42–/HS– and is also related to pH and dissolved carbonate concentra-
  tion. The Eh of groundwater is extremely difficult to measure accurately and equally difficult to
  predict on account of slow reaction kinetics involving the redox pairs themselves as well as reactions
  at measurement electrodes which might involve multiple co-existing redox pairs in disequilibrium
  (giving rise to so-called mixed potentials).
  For the purposes of SR-Site it is not altogether clear which of the above mentioned redox couples
  actually should be controlling groundwater Eh under repository conditions. For this reason, both
  cases are considered as separate case studies in the groundwater hydrogeochemical simulations used
  to forecast the evolution of groundwater chemistry in the repository environment /Salas et al. 2010/.
  For the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox pair, equilibrium with Fe(OH)3 is assumed to control the Fe3+ concentration
  using equilibrium constants consistent with the calibration model derived by /Grenthe et al. 1992/.
  For the SO42–/HS– redox pair, on the other hand, equilibrium with amorphous Fe(II)-monosulphide,
  FeS(am) is presumed to control the availability of HS–.



  20                                                                                                 R-10-48
In the previous data compilation /Crawford et al. 2006/ redox conditions were considered to be either
strongly reducing or mildly oxidising where a specified reference Eh (–250±100 mV) constituted
a broad cut-off between the two. Recommended Kd values were then given for both situations for
each radionuclide deemed to be sensitive to redox conditions. In most cases, the reducing form of
these radionuclides was presumed to be predominant at repository depth while the oxidising form
was typically considered only relevant for the surface environment. This choice was made based on
consideration of the most likely range of redox potentials at repository depth and wasn’t modelled on
a detailed level for individual radionuclides.
In the current compilation, hydrochemical simulation data calculated by /Salas et al. 2010/ (stored in
SKB’s TRAC system) enabled the detailed examination of redox behaviour for individual elements.
The choice of predominant redox state under repository conditions was evaluated by simulation
using PHREEQC /Parkhurst and Appelo 1999/ in conjunction with the SKB-TDB /Duro et al. 2006/
at different times during the repository groundwater evolution. This evaluation technique was also
extended to the treatment of sorption data where it was deemed necessary to ascertain the most likely
redox state present in order to correctly classify the reported data. This is complicated, however, by
the fact that for certain elements (principally, Pu) multiple redox states can co-exist simultaneously
at equilibrium in nearly equimolar quantities. The situation becomes particularly challenging when
one considers that any difference in sorptivity between co-existing redox states might lead to the
depletion of the more strongly sorbing state and a consequent readjustment of the redox species
distribution in the groundwater under equilibrium conditions. The possibility therefore exists for the
relative predominance of redox species to be shifted in the presence of a solid phase relative to that
which would be observed in an aqueous phase where sorptive surfaces are absent. These issues are
discussed in greater detail in the Appendices to this report where redox speciation is examined on a
case by case basis.
It is interesting to note that the prediction of strongly reducing conditions does not necessarily give
rise to the most favourable scenario with regard to radionuclide retention. In the case of uranium, for
example, strongly reducing conditions would imply both a low solubility of the tetravalent state and
strong retention by sorption. The essentially immobile 234U, however, represents a concentrated sec-
ondary source of 226Ra which is of considerable significance for calculations of far-field dose rates.
If, on the other hand, the groundwater chemistry was to favour the existence of the more soluble and
less strongly sorbing hexavalent state, uranium would be mobilised to a greater degree and might not
constitute an equally concentrated source of radium daughters. Although the same amount of activity
is produced by radioactive decay processes in both situations, the greater dilution of the source in
the latter case might give rise to lower far-field dose rates in certain scenarios of repository evolution.
This, however, also depends on whether the mobilised uranium is widely disseminated in the geosphere
or re-accumulated elsewhere in the system upon encountering altered redox conditions. Owing to
this uncertainty, calculations are made in SR-Site for both redox cases in order to account for either
possibility.
Although not a direct effect of redox, it should be noted that under certain conditions the retention
of radionuclides may be reduced by the presence of strong complexing agents called siderophores
which are excreted by bacteria. Bacterial siderophores are strong complexing agents released by
certain bacteria, usually under oxidising conditions (i.e. when Fe(III) availability is low) by those
bacteria that use the Fe(II/III) redox couple as an electron source. These complexing agents can also
bind certain radionuclides very strongly, resulting in reduced sorption on geological materials.
Bacteria capable of excreting siderophores have been cultivated from deep groundwater samples
obtained at the Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory (HRL) /Johnsson et al. 2006/. It is not currently known
whether there is a non-negligible background concentration of these complexing agents within
the groundwater from repository depth at the Forsmark or Laxemar sites owing to the difficulty of
directly identifying these by routine chemical analysis. Investigations at the Äspö HRL, on the other
hand, have confirmed that these substances are not present in the reducing groundwaters typically
found at repository depth /Essén et al. 2007/. Given that reducing conditions are expected to prevail
at repository depth, however, it is not thought that siderophores should be present in sufficient
concentrations to detrimentally impact radionuclide sorption and they are therefore neglected in
the data recommendations made for SR-Site.




R-10-48                                                                                                 21
Influence of temperature
As a general rule, solutes that have exothermic sorption reactions can, on theoretical grounds, be
expected to exhibit reduced sorptivity at higher temperatures whereas solutes with endothermic
reactions can be expected to have increased sorptivity. Temperature can also have an indirect
impact on sorption by altering the species distribution of the solutes in groundwater. By altering the
thermodynamic conditions for solution speciation reactions, competitive effects are therefore subtly
altered. This direct effect of temperature on reaction equilibrium constants is formalised in the Van’t
Hoff Equation (e.g. /Langmuir 1997/) which can be used to estimate the effect of temperature:
    K     ∆H r0  1 1  								(2-9)
log 1 =          − 
    K2     R  T2 T1 
Where Ki is the reaction equilibrium constant at temperature Ti, parameter R is the universal gas con-
stant, and DHr0 is the standard enthalpy of the reaction. This expression, however, can only be used if
DHr0 is known and is approximately constant over the temperature interval of interest. In cases where
the reaction enthalpy is not constant it is sometimes possible to recast the equilibrium reaction in a
so-called isocoulombic form where there are identical numbers and types of charge on both sides of
the equilibrium reaction equation. Having identical numbers of charge on both sides of the reaction
formula allows much of the temperature dependency of the interaction to mutually self-cancel. This
is due to the strong temperature dependency of the dielectric constant of water coupled with the fact
that the electrostatic interactions between ionic species and water tend to have the strongest influ-
ence on the enthalpy of the reaction /Puigdomenech et al. 1999/. An alternative approach used in, for
example, PHREEQC is based on the application of an empirical equation of the form:
                     C              E
log K eq = A + BT + + D log T + 2 						(2-10)
                     T              T
Where parameters A–E are empirical parameters derived by curve fitting actual temperature dependency
data, and Keq is the reaction equilibrium constant at temperature T. It is difficult to make robust predictions
in groundwater systems where there are many interacting chemical reactions since reaction enthalpy
data do not always exist for the full suite of chemical reactions. Extrapolation to temperatures other than
the standard temperature of 25°C is therefore fraught with the possibility of error due to internal data
inconsistency. This is particularly the case when sorption processes are involved, since reaction enthalpy
data for sorption reactions involving relevant minerals generally do not exist at the present time.
It has been noted by /Cronstrand 2005/ that sorption implies a decrease in translational freedom and
thus a negative change in entropy, ∆S associated with the process. Since a thermodynamic process at
constant temperature and pressure will only occur spontaneously if the change in Gibbs free energy,
∆G is less than zero, this implies exothermicity (i.e. by way of the relation defining the change in
Gibbs free energy, DG = DH–TDS). Given that temperature conditions in the geosphere are generally
expected to be somewhat less than 25°C, one would therefore expect sorptivity to be slightly higher
than that established in typical laboratory investigations. This reasoning might only be appropriate for
surface complexation reactions, however, since ion-exchange involves displacement of another cation
which complicates the interpretation of entropy change. Even in the case of surface complexation,
however, one must also consider the entropy change of other processes that must occur for sorption to
take place (e.g. deprotonation of surface sites). On the other hand, theoretical analyses for monovalent
ions by /Sahai 2000/ using ab-initio modelling techniques suggest that cation surface complexation
should increase modestly with temperature for most oxides, whereas anion surface complexation is
predicted to decrease. Whatever the case may be, the effect of temperature is expected to be small
relative to the overall uncertainty of the sorption data and therefore is neglected in SR-Site.


Influence of in situ stress
Although not strictly a chemical effect, in situ stresses have an influence on the sorptivity of rock by
reducing access of solutes to the pore system. Increasing stress conditions can compress the available
microporous space and pinch off diffusive pathways thereby restricting access to sorption sites. It
is therefore possible that the available sorptive surface area under in situ stress conditions might be
less than that estimated on the basis of laboratory measurements of BET surface area on intact core
samples.




22                                                                                                    R-10-48
Pore compression does relate to groundwater composition, however, by way of the anion exclusion
effect of the electrical double layer (EDL) associated with mineral surfaces in the restricted micropo-
rous spaces. The thickness of the EDL is related to the ionic strength of the porewater; the lower
the ionic strength, the greater the double layer thickness and vice versa. At sufficiently low ionic
strength, contacting or overlapping EDL from adjacent surfaces of micropores may significantly
restrict the access of anionic radionuclides to the rock matrix. Anionic solutes, however, tend to have
very low sorptivity on account of their preference for positively charged binding sites which are not
prevalent at normal groundwater pH levels (ferric oxyhydroxides excluded). In practice this means
that their sorptivity is dominated by the free storage capacity of the matrix porewater itself (i.e.
the matrix porosity). The effect of this, however, is unclear since it is not currently known by how
much the storage capacity decreases on account of pore compression coupled with anion exclusion.
Although the effect of anion exclusion is considered in the selection of rock matrix effective dif-
fusivities, the effect on matrix storage capacity is thought to be small relative to other uncertainties
and is therefore neglected in SR-Site.



2.2        Overview of sorption modelling approaches
2.2.1 Isotherm based methods
The simplest isotherm based method for modelling sorption is the linear distribution coefficient, or
Kd approach. The Kd value (typically given in units of m3/kg) is simply the ratio of immobilised and
dissolved solute that is specific for a particular solid phase composition, water chemistry, and solute
concentration. It is an empirical representation of a system that is only strictly applicable under those
exact conditions under which it is measured and is not explicitly dependent upon any specific sorp-
tion mechanism or speciation considerations. The sorption isotherm is simply defined in terms of the
sorbed concentration, S (mol/kg) and aqueous phase concentration, C (mol/m3) as:
S = KdC										(2-11)
Although not a physically accurate modelling approach, it is the most widely used owing to the ease with
which analytical or numerical solutions can be obtained for transport problems. An intrinsically appealing
feature of the linear approach is that it can be very easily related to a retardation effect for solute transport.
The retardation effect is a measure of the extent to which the travelling velocity of a solute plume (i.e. a
concentration front) is retarded by sorptive interactions relative to the velocity of water. The retardation
effect is usually formalised in terms of a retardation factor which is typically defined as:
          fe    ∂S
Rf = 1+      ρb    								(2-12)
          θf    ∂C
Here, fe is the fraction of solid material in the medium that can be assumed to be equilibrated with
the flowing water, θf is the flow porosity of the system, and ρb is the bulk density of the solid
material. The sorption intensity, ∂S/∂C for the linear isotherm is, of course, equal to the Kd value. In
a porous medium, the retardation factor, Rf for a solute undergoing linear equilibrium sorption can
therefore be defined as /Neretnieks and Rasmuson 1984/:
           fe
Rf = 1+       K ρ 									(2-13)
          θf d b
There are a number of slight variations on this formula depending upon how the variables are defined,
but they all have the same physical interpretation as described above. In a discretely fractured system,
for example, where the flowing water can equilibrate with the rock matrix to a depth δc (δt being the
transport aperture of the fracture), the average retardation factor for a flowpath, Rf can be written as:
          2δ c
Rf = 1+       K ρ 								(2-14)
          δt d b
The penetration depth, δc can be estimated from diffusion theory if the apparent diffusivity of the
rock matrix is known and the contact time during which the solute interacts with the rock. Since it
is the effective penetration depth associated with solute retardation that is of interest rather than the
absolute penetration depth, the appropriate contact time needed to calculate δc is not the absolute
time, but rather the transport time associated with solute migration /Crawford 2006/.


R-10-48                                                                                                        23
Other isotherm approaches attempt to capture some of the non-linear behaviour of sorption processes.
Here it is important to distinguish between non-linearities that arise due to evolving physicochemical
conditions and that arising due to physical properties of the substrate itself. The latter, classic non-
linearity arises due to the physical limitation implied by the existence of only a finite number of sorp-
tion binding sites. In the very simplest case, where there is only a single type of binding site, sorption
typically proceeds until the binding sites become fully occupied after which no additional monolayer
sorption can take place. This is the basis of the Langmuir isotherm /Langmuir 1918/ which, although
originally developed to explain physisorption of gas molecules, is mathematically equivalent to ionic
sorption processes of interest in environmental systems. The Langmuir isotherm is frequently given in
terms of the fractional occupancy of sorption sites, Г:
       S      K LC 								(2-15)
Γ=        =
     S max 1 + K LC
Where Smax is the maximum amount of solute that can be sorbed and KL is a constant. Even for this most
simple of non-linear sorption modelling approaches, difficulties become immediately apparent when a
retardation factor is calculated. For a solute that exhibits Langmuirian behaviour, the non-linearity arises
because the sorption intensity (∂S/∂C) varies as a function of aqueous phase concentration:
∂S       S max K L
    =              								(2-16)
dC (1 + K LC )2
The practical consequence of this is that the retardation effect varies depending on which part of the
reaction front one considers and the range over which the solute concentration varies. Taking cesium
(Cs) as an example, one can surmise that it is not only important to consider the concentration of radio-
active 135Cs being transported away from the repository, but also the natural background concentration
of non-radioactive 133Cs in the groundwater. If the concentration of 135Cs in the solute plume exceeds the
natural background level, then the non-linearity may affect the shape and velocity of the plume. If the
concentration of radioactive 135Cs is less than the natural background then the natural background sets
the relevant level at which sorptivity should be assessed for transport modelling of the radioisotope.
When one considers the additional effect of non-equilibrium matrix diffusion, the problem becomes
even more complex since the solute concentration, and consequently the sorptivity, varies with depth
in the rock matrix. Although this can be modelled in numerical transport models with relative ease, the
fact that it is not possible to find a closed analytical solution to the migration problem makes the use of
the non-linear sorption isotherm less useful for safety assessment in complex hydrogeological settings.
Many solutes start to exhibit non-linearity with regard to solute loading already at concentrations far
lower than what would be considered the maximum occupancy. This is generally because different types
of sorption sites exist which become successively saturated at different aqueous phase concentration
levels. In the case of clays such as illite, for example, it is well known that frayed edge sites (FES) exist
with a strong affinity for solutes such as Cs+ although with a low total sorption capacity (~1% of total
CEC). On the other hand, spectroscopic measurements suggest the existence of at least two different
sorption sites /Kim and Kirkpatrick 1997/ based upon the interpreted coordination environment of
sorbed Cs. As noted by /Baeyens and Bradbury 2004/ this implies at least three different site types in
total given that the FES binding sites are too few to be directly identified by spectroscopic methods.
The sorption binding sites on pristine surfaces of non-phyllosilicate minerals may also fall into different
groups depending on their crystallographic properties and surface reactivity and there is no particular
reason as to why only one particular class of binding site should exist. Indeed for rough mineral surfaces,
it is likely that there is a range of different binding sites with differing chemical reactive characteristics
owing to the local geometry of the surface and the coordination environment of surface reactive groups.
While it is feasible to define multiple surface sites using separate Langmuir isotherms an alternative
is to use the Freundlich isotherm. While it could be argued that the Freundlich isotherm sacrifices
physical realism (since it does not automatically predict an upper limit to sorptive capacity), it is much
simpler than the multi site Langmuir and is often used to model the sorption of solutes that exhibit non-
linearities over broad concentration ranges. On the other hand, the fact that there may be many different
sorption binding sites with differing sorptive properties means that it might not be possible to realisti-
cally parameterise a multisite Langmuir model that satisfactorily captures the non-linearity of sorption
over a sufficiently wide range of concentrations. In this respect the Freundlich isotherm could also be
considered a more accurate representation of the sorption process itself while being possibly based on


24                                                                                                   R-10-48
 a less rigorous, physical representation. It should be noted, however, that the Freundlich isotherm can
 actually be derived from first principles using statistical mechanical or kinetic arguments in the same
 fashion that is possible for the Langmuir isotherm /Appel 1973, Skopp 2009/. In the theoretical deriva-
 tion, the Freundlich isotherm then represents sorptive behaviour of a surface featuring a multitude of
 site types with lognormally distributed Langmuir constants. The Freundlich isotherm is defined as:
 S = KFCn									(2-17)
 The sorption intensity (∂S/∂C) for this isotherm also exhibits a non-linear dependency on aqueous
 phase concentration:
  ∂S
     = K F n C n −1									(2-18)
  dC
 Examples of each of these sorption isotherms are plotted in Figure 2-5 using model parameters taken
 from /Tsai et al. 2009/ for Cs(I) sorption on crushed granite in contact with deionised water. As can be
 seen from the plots, each of the isotherms may be useful for modelling purposes in different concen-
 tration ranges depending on how experimental data are fitted. Also important to note is the divergence
 of the different models in different concentration ranges. A Kd value estimated for sorption with a
 background Cs(I) concentration of 10–5 M, for example, would underestimate sorption at much lower
 concentrations although overestimate sorption at higher concentrations relative to the Freundlich
 isotherm as illustrated in Figure 2-5. Both the linear Kd and Freundlich isotherm approaches, however,
 fail to predict saturation at high surface loadings which the Langmuir isotherm does.
 Both the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms as illustrated in Figure 2-5 belong to a class of isotherm
 described as being convex. In the engineering literature they are frequently referred to as favourable
 isotherms since they facilitate more efficient design of separation systems based on adsorption. This
 is generally true for isotherms where higher aqueous concentrations of solute are associated with
 reduced sorption relative to that at lower solute concentrations (i.e. the curve of ∂S/∂C vs. C has a
 decreasing slope). In a practical sense what this means is that the low concentration leading edge
 of a solute plume is more strongly retarded than the high concentration regions near the centre of
 the plume. The fact that different parts of the sorption front move at different speeds, results in a
 sharpening of the leading edge of the sorption front and a simultaneous broadening of the trailing
 edge (unrelated to diffusive tailing).


              1.0E-02                                                                                                    1.0E-05




              1.0E-03
                                                                                                                         8.0E-06


              1.0E-04




S (mol/g)                                                                                                    S (mol/g)
                                                                                                                         6.0E-06

              1.0E-05


                                                                                                                         4.0E-06
              1.0E-06
                                                               Linear (Kd) isotherm

                                                               Langmuir isotherm
                                                                                                                                                             Linear (Kd) isotherm
              1.0E-07                                          Freundlich isotherm                                       2.0E-06
                                                                                                                                                             Langmuir isotherm
                                                               Maximum occupancy
                                                                                                                                                             Freundlich isotherm

              1.0E-08                                                                                                                                        Maximum background concentration

                     1.0E-09    1.0E-08     1.0E-07    1.0E-06    1.0E-05      1.0E-04   1.0E-03   1.0E-02               0.0E+00
                                                                                                                               0.0E+00   2.0E-07   4.0E-07    6.0E-07            8.0E-07        1.0E-06
                                                         C (mol/l)
            Approximate range of background Cs(I) concentraon at Forsmark                                                                              C (mol/l)


 Figure 2‑5. Examples of isotherms commonly used to model Cs(I) on granite shown on log-log axes (left)
 and linear axes (right). Also shown is the approximate background concentration range of Cs in groundwa-
 ter at the Forsmark site. Model parameters are taken from /Tsai et al. 2009/ and are for Cs(I) sorption on
 crushed granite in contact with deionised water.




 R-10-48                                                                                                                                                                               25
Although it is theoretically possible for solutes to exhibit concave behaviour (so-called unfavourable
isotherms) whereby higher aqueous concentrations of solute are associated with greater sorption
relative to that at lower solute concentrations, these are not typical of sorption processes relevant for
radionuclide transport modelling and do not need to be considered further. It should also be made
clear that when concave behaviour is discussed in this sense, we mean purely with regard to the
intrinsic non-linearity for the sorbing solute itself. When multicomponent effects are brought into
the mix, however, unfavourable behaviour can arise. This is particularly the case for specific classes
of ion-exchange reaction where groundwater of one composition displaces groundwater of another
composition in an aquifer system.
What is important to realise in the case of the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms is that it is always
possible, in principle, to find a concentration somewhere between the minimum and maximum
expected aqueous concentrations where a Kd can be estimated to give the average retardation of the
sorption front (however one chooses to define this). The average retardation effect, while useful for
risk estimates, does not reproduce details of the leading and trailing edges accurately although in
many situations this is a minor issue, particularly with regard to the trailing edge of a solute plume.
It is relatively easy to demonstrate this numerically in transport calculations, although it is also a
direct consequence of Rolle’s theorem for a continuously differentiable function as outlined by
/Holzbecher 2000/. As discussed later in Section 2.3.2, this is one of the main justifications for using
the linear Kd approach.
There are, of course, many other types of isotherm model that are variations on the basic Langmuir and
Freundlich concept. Among these the Tóth, Redlich-Peterson, Dubinin-Radushkevich, hybrid Langmuir-
Freundlich, and Frumkin isotherms are noteworthy for their usefulness in modelling aqueous phase
sorption processes. A full account of these is beyond the scope of the present document although a very
detailed overview is given by /Kinniburgh 1986/. It is interesting to note that the BET method /Brunauer
et al. 1938/ used to estimate mineral surface area is also based upon a sorption isotherm model, although
being applicable to condensable gas molecules, it also considers multiple layers of adsorbed gas
molecules – something that is not strictly applicable to aqueous phase sorption processes of the type
discussed here (although it could, in principle, be used to describe surface precipitation).
A particular problem with regard to the simpler sorption isotherm models is that they cannot
capture other kinds of non-linearity that might arise, for example, due to changing concentrations of
groundwater constituents that compete for the same sorption sites. The simplest isotherm model that
can capture competitive behaviour is the multicomponent Langmuir isotherm which is defined for
each sorbing solute, i as:
      S        K Li Ci
Γi = i =        n
                         								(2-19)
     Smax
           1 + ∑ K Li Ci
                1

As can be readily appreciated, the sorption intensity (∂S/∂C) varies not only as a function of aqueous
phase concentration for the migrating radionuclide, but also the concentration of solutes that compete
for binding sites. The retardation effect therefore not only has an intrinsic non-linearity related to the
concentration of the solute concerned but also a non-linearity related to the spatial and temporal vari-
ability of other groundwater constituents. These additional non-linearities can, however, be neglected if
sorption experiments are carried out using synthetic or actual groundwater samples that approximate the
chemistry of the groundwater under application conditions if it is additionally assumed that the actual
groundwater composition is relatively static over the timeframes considered. Over a glacial cycle, this
is rarely the case although one still can use simpler sorption modelling approaches in risk assessment
calculations if one assumes a pessimistic scenario for groundwater composition as a calculation basis.
There are other multicomponent models, although these have been less adopted in modelling of
environmental systems on account of the fact that they are sufficiently complex that mechanistic mod-
elling approaches are often preferable. Some of these models, however, are useful for substrates such
as humic substances that are difficult to cast in a mechanistic framework. Examples of some of these
approaches are given by /Černík et al. 1996, Rusch et al. 1997, Alkhamis and Wurster 2002, Wu et al.
2002/. It is noted, however, as these models become increasingly sophisticated the boundary between
the models regarded as semi-empirical isotherm based methods and the so-called mechanistic models,
becomes increasingly blurred. Mechanistic models of sorption are discussed in the next section.



26                                                                                                 R-10-48
2.2.2 Mechanistic models of sorption
Although some of the sorption isotherm-based approaches described in the previous section can be
shown to be thermodynamically rigorous in certain limiting situations, they are generally considered
to be semi-empirical in nature. The modelling approaches that are discussed in this section are
referred to as mechanistic in that they are more firmly rooted in principles of thermodynamic model-
ling for chemical reactive processes. In a similar fashion to the semi-empirical approaches, however,
it should always be remembered that such models are only as good as the fundamental assumptions
underlying their formulation and the quality of the data used to constrain their parameters. It is
frequently difficult to extract meaningful parameters for these models without detailed multidimen-
sional datasets and spectroscopic confirmation of sorption mechanisms and they therefore must be
deployed with care if subsequently used to inform safety assessment calculations.


Ion exchange models
In the literature it is not always clearly stated what the difference is between ion-exchange and surface
complexation models. Generally, however, ion-exchange approaches are used to model purely elec-
trostatic sorptive interactions in association with permanently charged sites. The distinction becomes
blurred, however, since sorption of essentially electrostatic nature is also responsible for outer-sphere
surface complexation in association with variably charged surface sites. The distinction becomes even
more blurred when one considers that the concept of inner-sphere and outer-sphere surface complexa-
tion is borrowed from solution chemistry where it refers to the coordination of ionic solutes with
polarised groups of water molecules in the hydration sphere of the ion. In some cases, solutes such as
Cs+ effectively lose their hydration sphere when undergoing electrostatic sorption and, for all practical
purposes, may be considered de-facto inner-sphere complexes with regard to their coordination envi-
ronment. Occasionally ion-exchange is used to model processes that may be more accurately described
in terms of (outer-sphere) surface complexation mechanisms, and vice versa. It is often unclear in the
literature why a particular modelling approach has been adopted and, although frequently justified by
observation of an apparent sensitivity of sorption to ionic strength effects, it is rarely defended in a
rigorous fashion by way of spectroscopic evidence.
Ion exchange is cast in a mass action formulation of chemical equilibrium which is analogous to
that used for other types of chemical reactions. There are a number of different formulations of ion-
exchange equilibrium, although they are all characterised by the mass action approach with conditional
equilibrium constants called exchange or selectivity coefficients. They are convenient to work with as
their formulation is similar to that used for speciation and dissolution-precipitation equilibria. The main
differences between the different formulations of ion exchange equilibria concern differences in the
way sorbed component activities are handled. Chemical equilibrium is defined in terms of chemical
potentials cast in the framework of the Gibbs-Duhem relation and it is therefore necessary to adopt
certain assumptions about the standard states of sorbed components in order to calculate thermody-
namically consistent activities and equilibrium constants. For example, in precipitation-dissolution
equilibria, the activity of solid phase is always equal to unity (i.e. the reaction is the same regardless
of how much or how little solid is present). For ion exchange, however, the concentration or fraction
of sorbed substance does influence the equilibrium. Different approaches such as the Gaines-Thomas,
Gapon, Vaneslow, and Rothmund-Kornfeld conventions have been developed to account for this.
The Gaines-Thomas convention defines sorbed phase activities based on the equivalent charge
fraction (i.e. fraction of the CEC) occupied by sorbed solute. The Vaneslow convention uses mole
fractions of exchangeable ions instead of equivalent charge fractions. The Gapon convention, on
the other hand, is defined in terms of mole fractions of exchange sites. The Rothmund-Kornfeld
approach is essentially a modification of the Vaneslow convention although with an additional
semi-empirical exponent for the aqueous phase ions in the mass action formula. Each of these are
useful in different situations since the full range of sorptive behaviour over large ranges of surface
loading is difficult to model accurately using the mass action approach even though it might be a
mechanistically sound description of ion-exchange sorption.
Ion-exchange reactions are usually defined in terms of the sorption of a solute with concurrent
displacement of a reference ion. Although other reference ions can be used, Ca2+ is typically
chosen as the reference in cation exchange since it is frequently the most abundant sorbed cation in
environmental systems. If a cation displaces another cation with the same charge (e.g. ion-exchange


R-10-48                                                                                                  27
of Sr2+ and Ca2+) the reaction is termed homovalent. If an ion displaces another of unlike charge
(e.g. ion-exchange of Na+ and Ca2+), the exchange reaction is termed heterovalent. Homovalent
ion-exchange reactions generally have selectivity coefficients that are approximately constant over
wide ranges of surface loading. Heterovalent ion-exchange reactions, however, do not always exhibit
constant selectivity coefficients and they must be considered as conditional constants dependent on
the particular range of conditions being modelled.
The sorption reaction for Cs(I), for example, is typically written as:
2Cs+ + CaX2 ⇔ Ca2+ + 2CsX							(2-20)
Using the Gaines-Thomas convention, the ion-exchange equilibrium relation is defined as:
                    [ ECs ] Ca 2+  							(2-21)
                     2
        γ Cs
           2
              + 
K GT ⋅           =
        γ 2+                 + 2
        Ca  [ ECa ] Cs 
Where, Ei is the equivalent fraction of occupied sorption sites for component i and γi is the activity
coefficient of the aqueous phase component. The selectivity coefficient is KGT to signify that the
equilibrium is defined in terms of the Gaines-Thomas convention. Although the Kd value is not
dependent on any particular sorption mechanism, it is still possible to define a Kd that operationally
describes the ratio of sorbed and dissolved solute in terms of ion-exchange equilibrium equations.
For the particular reaction given in Equation 2-20, assuming only trace concentrations of Cs+ sorbed
on the mineral surface (i.e. ECa ≈ 1), and neglecting aqueous phase speciation (and activity coef-
ficients), the Kd for Cs(I) sorption could be given approximately as:

Kd =
       [ ECs ] CEC ≈ CEC     K GT 							(2-22)
         Cs 
             +
                           Ca 2+ 

From inspection of the form of Equation 2-22, it should be clear that Kd as it is defined here is condi-
tional on the particular concentration of Ca2+ in the groundwater and therefore the Kd can be shown to
vary with groundwater ionic strength as reflected by the aqueous Ca2+ concentration (also noting that
sensitivity of sorption to ionic strength is a hallmark of ion-exchange).
Although this very simple treatment illustrates very simple competitive behaviour in a binary system,
the neglect of competition from other cations in the groundwater seriously limits the applicability of
Equation 2-22. For more complex groundwater systems, a range of competing ion-exchange reac-
tions need to be considered to calculate the sorbed phase partitioning (or an abstracted conditional Kd
value) for a given groundwater composition. A full account of competitive ion-exchange equilibria,
however, is beyond the scope of this document and the reader is directed to texts such as e.g./ Appelo
and Postma 2005/ or the review article by /Haworth 1990/ for more detailed explanations.


Surface complexation models
In the last thirty years or so, surface complexation models or SCM’s have become increasingly popular
modelling tools for predicting the transport of solutes in environmental systems. These approaches
attempt to model sorption in a similar fashion to aqueous phase complexation reactions while simul-
taneously accounting for electrostatic interactions with surface functional groups of variable charge.
These models are more flexible than ion exchange models as they consider the influence that pH has
upon surface charge. In addition, surface complexation models can also model adsorption of trace
solutes against the net surface charge of the sorbent /Langmuir 1997/, noting that the net charge simply
reflects the overall distribution of positive and negatively charged sites.
When formulating a surface complexation model, it is necessary to define chemical reactions describing
the protonation-deprotonation behaviour of surface reactive groups as well as the binding reaction for
the sorbing solute under consideration. Sorption models are typically described as being 1-pK or 2-pK
depending on how their pH dependent surface charge characteristics are modelled. The pK terminology
derives from the corresponding usage for the dissociation of acid molecules in water and is equal to the
negative logarithm of the acid dissociation constant (−log10Ka). The most common approach described
in the literature is based on the 2-pK formalism since it is conceptually thought to most accurately mirror
the true reaction mechanism. As pointed out by /Borkovec 1997/, however, this is actually an erroneous


28                                                                                                 R-10-48
assumption even though the 1-pK and 2-pK models can be shown to be mathematically equivalent in
many situations. This does not necessarily mean that the 1-pK approach is more correct since both may
be considered to be approximations of a more complex reality. In the 2-pK approach, the proton medi-
ated ionisation reaction of a surface site is conceptualised to consist of two sequential steps:
>SOH+2 ⇔ >SOH + H+ 		             pKa1						(2-23)
>SOH ⇔ >SO– + H+		                pKa2						(2-24)
In the 1-pK approach, on the other hand, only one reaction is used:
      +½
>SOH 2 ⇔ >SOH–½ + H+              pKa						(2-25)
The reason why the reaction mechanism implied by reaction Equation 2-23 and 2.24 might not be a
strictly correct physical interpretation is because when two protons bind to a single oxygen atom, the
difference between successive pK values is sufficiently large (∆pK > 10) that only one reaction step
can be reasonably observed within the normally accessible pH range /Hiemstra et al. 1989b/. Instead
of envisaging only a single ionisable surface group, the correct physical interpretation of the 2-pK
model is based on consideration of a pair of adjacent ionisable groups coordinating a single metal
ion. This alternative conceptual picture can then more readily explain the smaller difference between
successive pK values (∆pK ~ 2–4) estimated from 2-pK model fitting to experimental titration data
/Borkovec 1997/.
The particular form of the 1-pK reaction can be explained through consideration of the bond
valence principle as described by /Hiemstra et al. 1989b, 1996, Venema et al. 1998/. Since (hydr)
oxides of trivalent metals such as Al3+ and Fe3+ are frequently found in octahedral coordination to
six oxygen atoms, the Pauling bond valence principle /Pauling 1929/ states that each oxygen atom
must neutralise one sixth of the charge of the metal atom. For a trivalent metal atom this gives a
bond valence of +½ for a binding site with the oxygen atom coordinating a single metal centre. The
fractional charge associated with the bond implies that the hydroxyl group cannot be neutral thus
giving rise to the canonical fractional charges in Equation 2-25. Since an additional protonation step
is unlikely in the normal pH range, only one pKa value is required to describe the surface protonation
behaviour /Rosenqvist 2002/. Although fractional charges cannot physically exist as such, it should be
remembered that this is merely a formal statement of the charge balance for a site and is essentially
a mathematical convenience /Hiemstra et al. 1989b/.
In the case of gibbsite (Al(OH)3), both singly-coordinated aluminol surface groups (AlOH), and
doubly coordinated (Al2OH) surface groups exist, although with differing distributions on different
crystal faces. Generally, the doubly coordinated groups are neutral at normal groundwater pH and
are resistant to both protonation and deprotonation reactions. Similar properties can be found for
ferric oxides and oxyhydroxides on account of their analogous coordination structure. For silica
surfaces, there are silanol groups (SiOH) where an oxygen atom coordinates with a single Si atom,
and siloxane groups (Si2OH) where an oxygen atom coordinates with two Si atoms. The doubly
coordinated siloxane groups have a sufficiently high pKa value that are very difficult to protonate
and may be considered for all practical purposes inert under normal groundwater conditions. Since
the central Si atom (+4 charge) is tetrahedrally coordinated with four oxygen atoms in silanol
groups, this gives a bond valence of +1 and thus a formally neutral surface hydroxyl group. Silanol
groups can deprotonate readily, although are difficult to protonate at normal groundwater pH. This
means that the surface charging properties of quartz is largely determined by the deprotonation of the
singly coordinated silanol groups /van Hal et al. 1996/.
As this discussion suggests, the situation differs for oxygen atoms in different coordination environ-
ments with metal atoms of different valence (i.e. charges other than ±½ are possible in the 1-pK
framework) and also predicts that different faces of mineral crystals, on theoretical grounds, can be
shown to have different reactive properties. This realisation is the central theme around which the
MUSIC /Hiemstra et al. 1989a, b/ and more recent CD-MUSIC /Hiemstra and Van Riemsdijk 1996/
modelling approaches are organised. The fundamental difference between these is that the MUSIC
model essentially only describes protonation-deprotonation reactions and surface charge development,
whereas the CD-MUSIC model expands the description to include surface complexation reactions
of other solutes. In the MUSIC framework, intrinsic pKa values are estimated theoretically based on
explicit consideration of the coordination environment of surface groups.


R-10-48                                                                                             29
Although the 2-pK approach is most widely used, there are obvious advantages to the 1-pK approach
since it requires one less fitting parameter to model the pH dependent charging behaviour of mineral
surfaces. In principle, the proton binding constant in the 1-pK model can be estimated theoretically
although this assumes a pristine surface which is rarely the case for real minerals. One typically
performs rapid pH titrations of a mineral surface in contact solutions of different ionic strength to
distinguish the surface charge characteristics from electrostatic effects. Proton binding constants for
the 2-pK reactions are customarily derived by non-linear least squares fitting or, in earlier works, by
graphical methods. The 1-pK model is simpler in that the pKa for the reaction is numerically equal to
the negative value of the pH at the pristine point of zero net proton charge (pHPZNPC), although this is
not always easy to assess since it is not necessarily the same as the point of net zero charge (pHPZC)
as noted in Section 2.1.1. In the 2-pK version, the arithmetic average of the pK1a and pK2a constants
is equal to the pHPZNPC. For all practical purposes both models perform identically well. There are,
of course, many additional issues that need to be carefully considered when performing surface
titrations, particularly biasing effects related to electrode kinetics, mineral dissolution, and diffusive
disequilibrium.
Having established the pH dependent charge characteristics of the substrate, it is necessary to
perform sorption experiments for range of different contact water compositions that probe the
parameter space of the postulated reaction mechanism. Typically in the literature the focus is upon
measurement of the pH sorption edge for a solute given that pH has a very strong influence on sorp-
tion. A typical template for a metal cation sorption reaction is written in the 2-pK formalism as:
>SO– + Mv+ ⇔ >SOMv–1		              KM					                                               (2-26)
In the 1-pK formalism, one might write for an equivalent monodentate reaction:
>SOH–½ + Mv+ ⇔ >SOHMv–½             KM					                                               (2-27)
Although the parsimony of 1-pK approach is compelling with regard to the description of protonation-
deprotonation reactions of surface groups, the less intuitive form of the metal binding reaction may
partly explain the enduring popularity of the 2-pK based modelling approaches. A further complication
with 1-pK modelling of solute surface complexation (at least for CD-MUSIC) is that the theoretical
framework implies several possibilities for the denticity of the reaction both with regard to the binding
of the sorbing solute itself as well as whether the multi-dentate reactive groups are coordinated to
geminal (same) or vicinal (adjacent) metal centres. Resolution of these issues typically involves
synthesis of detailed information derived from crystallography and X-ray spectroscopic measurements
of coordination environments of surface sorbed species. This does not seek to claim that multi-dentate
surface complexes are not feasible in the other modelling approaches, but the possibility is frequently
disregarded in modelling and a simple mono-dentate reaction template is typically assumed. Multi-
dentate surface complexation reactions are also problematic since there is no theoretical basis currently
available for prediction of surface species activity coefficients (see, e.g. the preface commentary
in /Lützenkirchen 2006/). For the monodentate case this is avoided since activity coefficient terms
mutually self cancel in the numerator and denominator of the mass action equation. Some investigators
ignore this by assuming activity coefficients of unity (e.g. /Appelo and Postma 1999/) while others
introduce a surface activity correction term as an additional fitting parameter (e.g. /Dyer et al. 2004/).
Usually a simple electrolyte background solution is used in sorption experiments, typically NaClO4
of some specified ionic strength, to avoid the confounding effect of additional side reactions and
competitive sorption with other groundwater constituents. The implicit assumption is that if the
postulated reaction mechanism is correct, then additional complexity in the form of additional
aqueous phase reactions and competing sorption reactions can be added later in forward modelling
without invalidating the model. As noted previously, this constitutes an extrapolation outside of the
range of model calibration and should only be done with great care unless reaction mechanisms can
be properly validated with spectroscopic measurement data.
A more cautious approach, of course, is to carry out sorption experiments where all groundwater vari-
ables of relevance are varied throughout their expected range of variability. At the very least this would
involve pH and carbonate as master variables with a groundwater of approximately the same composi-
tion as that expected under application conditions (including minor solutes that compete for sorption
sites). Even this, however is a large undertaking as a considerable number of independent measurements
need to be made to obtain statistically assured data even with an optimised experimental design.


30                                                                                                 R-10-48
Handling of electrostatic effects
The different SCM’s are very similar, differing largely in the way in which electrostatic interaction
is handled. Electroneutrality in the solution is always maintained by a loose cloud of electrolyte
counter ions adjacent but delocalised to the mineral surface. This is referred to as the electric double
layer or diffuse double layer and exactly counterbalances the net surface charge of the mineral. The
physical mineral surface including functional groups and adsorbed ions is referred to as the Stern
layer and its charge is equal to the sum of permanent charge, net proton charge due to binding of pro-
tons or hydroxyl ions, as well as the charge due to inner-sphere and outer-sphere surface complexes.
Inner sphere complexes are those formed by direct covalent bonding between a non-hydrated ion and
a surface functional group. Outer sphere complexes are those, for example, involving hydrated ions
where the ion itself is not directly bound to the surface ligand, but rather by proxy via its associated
water molecules. Ions sorbed as inner-sphere complexes are said to belong to the inner Helmholtz
plane (or o-plane), while outer sphere complexes are said to belong to the outer Helmholtz plane
(or β-plane), which is also the boundary of closest approach for ions in the diffuse layer. The outer
boundary of the ions in the diffuse layer where the ionic composition is approximately the same as
the bulk is referred to as the d-plane.
Based on the fundamental principal of electroneutrality, the balance of different surface charge
contributions and that of the diffuse layer must sum to zero (e.g. /Stumm and Morgan 1996/):
σP = σF + σH + σIS + σOS								(2-28)
σP + σd = 0									(2-29)
Here, σF is the permanent charge (see Section 2.1.1), σH is the net proton charge, σIS is the charge of
inner sphere surface complexed species, σOS is the charge of outer sphere surface complexed species.
The total net surface charge, σp is balanced by the charge associated with the swarm of counter-ions
comprising the diffuse layer, σd.
In most modelling approaches, however, it is not strictly important to distinguish between the first
three terms in Equation 2-28 and one typically defines the charge balance in terms of the net charge
of the o-plane (σF + σH + σIS), β-plane (σOS ), and d-plane (σd):
σ0 + σβ + σd = 0									(2-30)
Since mineral surfaces with significant numbers of surface reactive groups tend to have small perma-
nent charge contributions, σF is typically neglected. For basal and interlayer planes of phyllosilicate
minerals, however, the opposite is true and this is one of the reasons why ion-exchange is frequently
modelled as a separate phenomenon to surface complexation.
The distribution of electrical potential between the surface and the solution represents an energy
barrier that influences surface complexation by way of the work that must be done in moving ions
across the potential gradient between the charged surface and the bulk solution. As there is no direct
way of determining the activity of ions at the mineral surface it must be related to the activity in the
bulk solution by taking into consideration the electrostatic work incurred in moving charges to and
from the bulk solution and surface. This electrostatic effect is corrected for using the Boltzmann
distribution in accordance with the Guoy-Chapman theory of the diffuse double layer.
Since the Gibbs free energy of a surface complexation reaction is made up of a chemical reaction
term and a Coulombic contribution, the apparent equilibrium constant for an inner sphere surface
complexation, or protonation reaction can be given in the form /Appelo and Postma 2005/:
                                 z Fψ 0
        IS
log10 K app = log10 K intIS +           							(2-31)
                                RT ln10
Here, z is the charge number of the surface species, F is Faraday’s constant, R is the universal gas
constant, and T is the absolute temperature. The variable ψ0 is the surface potential. Since the surface
potential cannot be measured directly, it is necessary to estimate the surface charge, σ and then cal-
culate the potential using a physical model that relates charge and surface potential. The Coulombic
contribution (second expression on the right in Equation 2-31) can be considered an electrostatic
correction term to the standard mass action expression that one would construct for a surface com-



R-10-48                                                                                               31
plexation reaction at equilibrium. It should be noted that although the intrinsic constant Kint does not
change with solution ionic strength, the apparent equilibrium constant, Kapp is influenced by ionic
strength (and therefore only a conditional constant). When deriving protonation/deprotonation and
solute binding constants for a variably charged surface it is therefore important to be able to separate
the chemical and Coulombic contributions.
In general, all SCM’s use the same electrostatic correction factor as defined by Equation 2-31. The
main difference between the various SCM’s, however, depends mainly upon how the spatial distribu-
tion of covalently bonded and electrostatically bonded counter ions is conceptualised. The implicit
assumptions in these have consequences for how electrical potential is calculated and the range of
phenomena that can be modelled. The different main types of surface complexation models that are
discussed in the literature fall into the types illustrated in Figure 2-6.
The simplest model that can be conceptualised, however, neglects electrostatic charge entirely and
simply models the surface complexation reactions using conditional equilibrium constants that are
not corrected for electrostatic effects. This is referred to as a non-electrostatic model (NEM). Since
the thickness of the electrical double layer and consequently, the work required moving charges from
the bulk solution to the interface is dependent on ionic strength, one implication of the NEM is that
ionic strength effects cannot be modelled and the model is only strictly valid for an approximately
fixed groundwater ionic strength.


Constant Capacitance Model (CCM)
In the constant capacitance model (CCM) /Schindler et al. 1976/, it is assumed that both specifically
adsorbed ions as well as electrostatically bound counter ions are held tightly in a single layer at a
distance exactly adjacent to the surface and no distinction is made between the o- and β-planes and
the diffuse layer. The surface potential, ψ0 is calculated by assuming that it is balanced by a layer of
counter-ions in a physical analogue to a parallel plate capacitor. In this physical model, the variation
of electrical potential with distance is linearly related to the surface charge by way of the capacitance
of this layer which is treated as a fitting parameter:
σp (C/m2) = Cψ0									(2-32)


 potential




                   distance                                σ 0 = C1 (ψ 0 −ψ β )              σ 0 = C1 (ψ 0 −ψ β )
                                    σ0 = σd
                                                           σβ = σd                           σ β = σ 0 + C2 (ψ d −ψ β )

      σ 0 = Cψ 0                    σ d ≈ 2.3 I ψ 0        σ d ≈ 2.3 I ψ d                   σ d ≈ 2.3 I ψ d


ψ0                            ψ0                      ψ0                               ψ0
                                                                                                                         d-plane
                                                      ψd                               ψβ
                                                                                       ψd
                                                                                                                         β-plane

                                                                                                                         O-plane


     σ0                            σ0                      σ0 σβ                            σ0   σβ
                                               σd                                 σd                                σd

      a) CCM                        b) DLM                 c) BSM                           d) TLM

Figure 2‑6. Illustration of different types of surface complexation models differing mainly in the concep-
tualisation of surface charge. Models shown are a) constant capacitance model (CCM), b) double layer
model (DLM), c) basic Stern model (BSM), and d) triple layer model (TLM).




32                                                                                                                   R-10-48
Since the model is abstracted to a single layer, only inner sphere surface complexes can be modelled
with this approach. The model was originally developed for low surface potential and high ionic
strength situations where the diffuse layer is sufficiently collapsed that the bulk composition of the
aqueous phase and the diffuse layer are roughly the same /Lützenkirchen 1999/. Model parameters
are therefore conditional in nature and cannot be extrapolated far outside the range of ionic strength
calibration. Although simple, its usefulness stems from the fact that being conditional with regard to
ionic strength, it is not necessary to characterise electrolyte binding constants as is necessary for the
BSM and TLM approaches.


Diffuse Double Layer Model (DLM)
In the widely used diffuse double layer model (DLM), no distinction is made between the o- and
β-planes, although electrostatically held ions are consigned to the diffuse layer /Stumm et al. 1976/.
Similarly to the CCM, only inner sphere surface complexes can be modelled using this approach
and therefore the full range of competitive effects between weakly and strongly binding ions cannot
be modelled. In this model it is furthermore assumed that there is no potential difference between
the surface and the boundary of the β-plane and that the electrostatically held ions are dispersed
normally to the surface according to a Boltzmann distribution. This gives an exponential decrease in
potential with distance from the β-plane to the diffuse layer boundary. The DLM is versatile since it
is applicable over a wider range of ionic strengths than the CCM approach.
In the DLM, the surface charge is related to the potential by way of a theoretical expression derived
from Guoy-Chapman theory (although it is noted that this has also been criticised for not being
a physically realistic representation /Fawcett 2006/). For a symmetric electrolyte where all major
cations and anions are of the same valence, the relation between surface charge and surface potential
is given by:
                                     Fψ 
σ P (C/m 2 ) = ( 8ε ε 0 RT ) I sinh  0  ≈ 2.3 I ψ 0 (25°C)				(2-33)
                                     2 RT 
One reason for the popularity of the DLM is that the conditional capacitance of the model is fixed by
theory rather than being treated as a fitting parameter and that the square root dependence on ionic
strength allows extrapolation to a wider range (i.e. low to mid-range) of ionic strengths than can be
considered using the CCM.
A variation of the DLM, known as the basic Stern model (BSM) /Bowden et al. 1977/, differs in
that a capacitance is assumed over the interval between the surface and the o-plane, with a constant
potential assumed between the o- and β-planes. This model allows for the formation of outer sphere
complexes which makes it more similar in many respects to the TLM approach. The basic Stern
model, however, requires additional adjustable parameters as discussed below for the TLM.


Triple Layer Model (TLM)
In the triple layer model (TLM), a distinction is made between the o- and β-planes and, as previously,
a Boltzmann distribution describes charge delocalisation in the diffuse layer /Davis et al. 1978, Davis
and Leckie 1978, Righetto et al. 1995/. In this model, however, the capacitance between the surface
and the o-plane, and between the o- and β-planes are considered together with the distribution of
charge in the diffuse double layer. The abstraction to three layers allows for the modelling of outer
sphere surface complexes which includes binding of ions belonging to the background electrolyte.
Since outer-sphere surface complexes are delocalised from the surface, the electrostatic correction
term in Equation 2-31 needs to be adjusted to take this into account:
                              z F (ψ 0 −ψ β )
        OS
log10 K app           OS
            = log10 K int +                     						(2-34)
                                RT ln10
The abstraction to three layers, however, implies additional adjustable parameters in the form of
the layer capacitances and electrolyte ion binding constants that need to be fitted to experimental
data. The additional complexity of the TLM means that it is able to simulate competitive behaviour
between weakly sorbing (outer sphere) and strongly sorbing (inner sphere) surface complexes and is
workable over a much wider range of ionic strengths than the DLM. For systems where the expected


R-10-48                                                                                                33
aqueous phase can change from non-saline to strongly saline conditions over time, this modelling
approach is arguably the most versatile. The increased versatility comes, however, at the expense of
increased model complexity with additional adjustable parameters.
A variation on the concept of the triple layer model, which accounts for different types of surface site
is the charge distribution, multisite complexation (CD-MUSIC) model /Hiemstra and Van Riemsdijk
1996/. This modelling approach is different in that the binding constants can be, at least in principle,
determined by theoretical consideration of the coordination environment of surface reactive groups.
In practice there are additional uncertainties in the formulation of typical surface complexation
problems that necessitate fitting of model parameters to experimentally measured sorption isotherm
data. Unlike the other modelling approaches, however, CD-MUSIC does appear to provide a
theoretical framework within which molecular level information can be combined with macroscopic
measurement data in an internally consistent mechanistic description. Although very promising, a
lack of data for minerals of interest in environmental systems, the need for detailed consideration
of crystallographic and spectroscopic information, and the wide popularity of the simpler DLM has
meant that uptake of this modelling approach has been slow.


Practical considerations related to SCM modelling approaches
The various surface complexation models described above are useful in different situations depend-
ing on the range of behaviours that one intends to model. The CCM model for instance is not much
better than the NEM model since it is restricted to the ionic strength corresponding to that of the con-
tact solutions used for laboratory experiments from which binding constants are derived. The DLM
model is more versatile in that it is relatively simple and applicable to wider range of groundwater
compositions although mostly restricted to relatively low ionic strengths. The main disadvantage
with these approaches is that competition between inner and outer-sphere surface complexation reac-
tions cannot be handled. For solutes where mixed inner and outer sphere sorption may be important,
these modelling approaches are not always satisfactory. It should also be noted that the chemical
kinetics of certain sorption reactions is known to be related to the interplay between inner and outer
sphere surface complexation mechanisms /Hachiya et al. 1984, Hayes and Leckie 1987, Wehrli
et al. 1990/. In order to model inner and outer sphere equilibrium competition and indeed, chemical
kinetics of sorption, one must turn to one of the TLM based modelling approaches.
One of the greatest weaknesses associated with surface complexation models, particularly the various
forms of the triple layer model, is the number of adjustable parameters that need to be fitted to
macro­scopic experimental data. Surface complexation models are very sensitive to certain parameters
and it is frequently not possible to obtain an optimised set of reaction constants and capacitances that
uniquely describe the system being modelled. It is also difficult to properly separate intrinsic and
electrostatic effects given that only a very approximate correction is possible in the Guoy-Chapman
derived framework. Parameters derived for a particular model (e.g. DLM, TLM, etc) are not transfer-
rable between different modelling approaches and generally the raw data must be reinterpreted to
provide model specific parameters.
Validation of these models also typically requires some kind of spectroscopic supporting evidence
to show that the reaction mechanisms are reasonable given that one can obtain very convincing fits
to data using reactions that are plausible although entirely fictive. As a means of interpolating data
sets this is not necessarily a large deficiency since quantitatively accurate results are obtainable even
if mechanistic attributes are uncertain. In the absence of very detailed supporting data, however,
these models are best not used to make predictions of sorption outside of their range of calibration
since their intrinsic non-linear nature can result in strongly deviating and physically non-meaningful
results.
As pointed out by /Kulik 2006/, even these very sophisticated modelling approaches can only strictly
simulate Langmuir isotherm behaviour with the added possibility of changing populations of surface
reactive sites due to evolving bulk solution chemistry. More complex, non-ideal behaviour involving
site heterogeneities, lateral interactions, and surface precipitation cannot be modelled in a mechanisti-
cally correct manner using these techniques even though there are some semi-mechanistic extensions
to the basic models (e.g. /Farley et al. 1985/) that have been proposed to model a wider continuum of
processes.



34                                                                                                R-10-48
In one of the earliest and most widely known implementations of the DLM /Dzombak and Morel
1990/, it was found that the non-linear appearance of the sorption isotherm for cation adsorption on
ferric oxyhydroxides required the definition of two different classes of surface group referred to as
strong and weak sites, respectively. The particular form of the sorption isotherm also requires the strong
sites to be few in number whereas the weak binding sites are more numerous. Although mechanistically
reasonable and an overall successful modelling technique, there is little spectroscopic support for
the particular assumptions inherent in this scheme and it is essentially a semi-empirical approach to
modelling sorption heterogeneity. Although approaches such as the CD-MUSIC model attempt to place
certain classes of heterogeneity on more mechanistically anchored footing, there are still large gaps
in understanding and the availability of data that hamper the deployment of such models in predicting
sorption in even simple systems and much less, complex mineral assemblages such as granite.
In spite of this, the ability to model Langmuirian behaviour with dynamic populations of binding
sites is a great achievement and must be acknowledged as vastly superior to the assumption of a
constant Kd at least in terms of its mechanistic explanatory ability even if not as useful for risk
assessment calculations. To illustrate the relation between a simple SCM and the Langmuir isotherm
it is useful to consider a simplified example. Here, we shall consider a DLM formulation (actually
NEM, as electrostatics are neglected) since this is arguably the most practical for illustrative
purposes. Assuming a 1-pK model for pH dependent surface charge and neglecting aqueous phase
activities, the mass action equilibrium equations can be given as:

Ka =
       {> SOH } H  ⋅ exp  − Fψ  						(2-35)
             −½           +
                                    0
                                   
          {> SOH } +½
                   2          RT 


K =
      {> SOHM } ⋅ exp  − vFψ  						(2-36)
                        v −½
                                        0
 M
    {> SOH } M   RT 
              −½               v+



Although there are different conventions for defining the activity of the surface species, for the
purposes of this discussion we can define them in terms of mole fractions of surface sites. There has
been much discussion in recent years concerning appropriate standard reference states for sorbed
surface species since the density of charged sites per unit surface area used in the electrostatic cor-
rection term is very sensitive to the estimated surface area of the mineral surface. A full discussion
concerning this is beyond the scope of this report although a detailed overview of some of the most
important issues is documented in /Sverjensky 2003/.
The mole fraction of different surface species must sum to unity, and thus in our particular example:

1 = {> SOH 2+½ } + {> SOHM v −½ } + {> SOH −½ } 					(2-37)
If the electrostatic correction terms are neglected, Equation 2-35–2.37 can be combined to give:
                              M v +  K a K M
{> SOHM v−½ } =     H +  + K a K M  M v +  + K a
                                                         						(2-38)


It is easy to see that Equation 2-38 is analogous to that for a Langmuir isotherm:
                        M v +  K L
{>  SOM  v −½
              } s 1 + Mv+  K 							(2-39)
               = Γ =
                                   L
Where, the Langmuir constant is defined as:
       Ka KM
KL =                 									(2-40)
     K a +  H + 

As can be seen from the definition of the conditional Langmuir constant in Equation 2-40, the
simplified NEM surface complexation model not only captures the intrinsic non-linearity of the
sorption reaction (i.e. with regard to solute concentration), but also the non-linearity related to the
changing population of charged binding sites at different pH levels. Provided the free concentration
of the cation Mv+ is approximately the same as the total concentration, a conditionally constant Kd
value could then be defined as:


R-10-48                                                                                                35
                          Ka KM
K d ≈ ns ⋅                                   							(2-41)
              H  + K a K M  M  + K a
              +                    v+



Where ns (mol/kg) is the total concentration of binding sites including all speciated forms given in
Equation 2-37. If, as is typically the case, the free concentration of Mv+ represents only a small frac-
tion of the total concentration, then an additional speciation correction term is needed to account for
this. In general, this would give additional indirect dependencies for Kd on pH, pCO2, and possibly
other groundwater compositional parameters as discussed previously in Section 2.1.4.
A full account of the different SCM modelling approaches, including their applications to more
complex environmental sorbents is beyond the scope of this document and this section should be
seen as more of an overview of mechanisms and their abstraction in various modelling approaches.
There are a large number of detailed reviews in the open literature /Haworth 1990, Goldberg et al.
2007/ and accounts in various textbooks, e.g. /Stumm and Morgan 1996, Appelo and Postma 2005,
Lützenkirchen 2006/ which may serve as a basis for further reading although these are too numerous
to give more than a brief listing here. The interested reader is encouraged, however, to revisit
some of the original references documented in these sources since this is frequently where many
of the underlying assumptions are discussed in greatest detail. The deployment of SCM modelling
techniques in more complex environmental systems of interest in nuclear waste management is also
documented in the Phase I and II OECD-NEA reports on sorption modelling /NEA 2001b, 2005/ and
in e.g. /Davis et al. 1998, Jenne 1998/. At the time of writing of this report, Phase III of the OECD-
NEA sorption modelling project is still underway and will result in a guidance document covering
many of the unresolved issues highlighted in the Phase II report for this rapidly evolving field.



2.3          Safety assessment modelling
2.3.1 Overview of modelling approach
In the safety assessment framework that underpins the site descriptive models prepared for Forsmark
and Laxemar, solute transport is conceptualised to occur by advective flow along a migration path
where retention is caused by matrix diffusion and equilibrium sorption on rock matrix microsurfaces
/Berglund and Selroos 2003/. For modelling purposes these processes are usually assumed to be
reversible and linear (thereby implying a Fickian formulation of matrix diffusion). This approach is
also used in the SR-Site safety assessment.
In SR-Site, diffusive transport of solute within the rock matrix is characterised by an effective
diffusivity, De that can vary spatially depending upon the local microstructural properties of the
rock. The effective diffusivity of specific solutes in the rock depends on the geometric structure and
connectivity of the rock matrix porosity which is conceptualised to consist of both microfractures
and grain boundary porosity. The handling of effective diffusivity and data used in SR-Site is
discussed in the Data report /SKB 2010b/. In a similar fashion, the sorptive properties of the rock
are modelled based on the assumption of a constant linear partitioning coefficient, Kd which also can
vary spatially depending on the local mineralogy of the rock and porewater chemistry. The residence
time distribution of a solute subject to advective transport and retardation by matrix diffusion and
linear sorption is a function of the master variables De, Kd and the flow-wetted surface to flow ratio
which is also referred to as the F-factor or hydrodynamic transport resistance /SKB 2010b/. In
SR-Site, the diffusive mass transfer to the rock matrix is furthermore assumed to be one-dimensional
and perpendicular to the advective flowpath along which the radionuclide is transported. The
consequences of this assumption are explored further in /Crawford 2008/ where it is shown that the
assumption is cautious within a safety assessment framework and may actually underestimate solute
uptake to the rock matrix.
For a spatially variable although temporally constant De and Kd, the residence time distribution of a
transported radionuclide undergoing first-order decay is described by the Laplace space equation:
          1                       L          dF ( x )  					(2-42)
c% f =
         s+λ
                  (     )
             exp −tw s + λ ⋅ exp  ∫ ψm ( x )
                                 
                                    0           dx
                                                      dx
                                                        




36                                                                                               R-10-48
Where, s is the Laplace space variable, λ is the radionuclide decay constant, tw is the advective travel
time, F(x) is the F-factor along an advective transport flowpath of length L, and ψ is a function
describing the spatially variable retention properties of the rock matrix. Implicit in this mathematical
formulation is the assumption of homogeneous (i.e. spatially invariant) matrix retention properties
perpendicular to the advective flowpath as outlined above, although the material properties of the
rock matrix are allowed to vary along the length of the transport path. For a homogeneous rock
matrix of limited extent, δm the function ψ is given by:
                                       
ψm = De (θ m + K d ρ s )( s + λ ) tanh  δ m
                                               (θ m + K d ρ s )( s + λ )  				(2-43)
                                                   De      
                                                           
Here, θm is the rock matrix storage porosity and ρs is the true solid rock density (i.e. crystallographic
density, excluding porosity). The sum of the parameter group, Kd ρs and the porosity, θm is the specific
volumetric storage capacity of the rock matrix, denoted K. It should be noted that the assumption of a
limited matrix depth does not necessarily relate to any physical limitation of connected matrix porosity,
but is a modelling convenience arising out of the desire to avoid double counting matrix retention
where the possibility exists for separate advective flowpaths in close proximity. In SR-Site, the matrix
depth is deemed to be equal to half the average separation distance between flow bearing fractures
although the physically connected matrix porosity is thought to be unlimited. Further discussion and
justification of this can be found in /SKB 2010b/. In the case of a rock matrix of unlimited depth,
Equation 2-43 reduces to:
ψm = De (θ m + K d ρ s )( s + λ ) = De K ( s + λ ) = N MPG s + λ 			(2-44)
The square root of the effective diffusivity and volumetric storage capacity product is often referred
to as the material properties group or NMPG. For the simplified case of an unlimited rock matrix and
homogeneous rock matrix properties along a flowpath, the residence time distribution for a constant
concentration source term is then given by:
 C          F De (θ m + K d ρ s )         F N      
    = erfc  ⋅                      = erfc  ⋅ MPG  				(2-45)
C0         2         t − tw                2 t −t 
                                                 w 


Although the general principals are similar, it should be noted that in codes used for safety assessment,
the algorithmic implementation of the solution to the reactive transport problem may differ slightly to
the formulation given above since consideration also must be given to actinide decay chains.
Under the influence of tectonic forces in combination with weathering processes and previous cycles
of hydrothermal alteration, it is generally expected that there is variability in material properties
of the rock matrix perpendicular to the advective flowpath and extending some distance into the
rock from flow-bearing fracture surfaces. Generally, there is a greater intensity of microfracturing
and porosity near the fracture surface which is often accompanied by changes in mineralogy. This
typically results in enhanced retention properties of the altered rock relative to the unaltered rock
further away from the fracture surfaces. In SR-Site, such depth dependent variations in sorptive and
diffusive properties are neglected by appealing to arguments of caution. The sorptive and diffusive
properties of the rock are therefore assumed to be determined by the properties of the intact and
unaltered rock matrix.
In certain situations it may be appropriate to model the additional sorptive retention of radionuclides
on a fracture surface coating possessing dissimilar material properties to the rock matrix itself.
Since diffusive equilibrium can usually be assumed for fracture coatings over the timescales typical
of safety assessment conditions this is usually assumed to be an equilibrium retardation process
characterised by a retardation factor Rf. In this case, the retarded advective travel time Rf tw would be
used in place of tw in Equation 2-42 or 2-45. In SR-Site this additional retention mechanism is also
neglected given that fracture coatings are thought to exhibit enhanced retention properties relative
to the rock matrix proper and owing to the difficulty in demonstrating the existence of a contiguous
fracture coating of specified thickness and sorptivity along the advective flowpaths through the geo-
sphere. Further justification of this assumption may be found in the SR-Site Radionuclide transport
report /SKB 2010d/.




R-10-48                                                                                                37
2.3.2 Justification for the assumption of a linear sorption process
The use of a Fickian model for solute diffusion in combination with a linear model of sorption are model-
ling simplifications of what is in reality a complex, coupled reactive transport process. Generally, such
simplifications are justified on the basis that the transported radionuclides are considered to be extremely
dilute, trace components within the groundwater. There is a broad scientific consensus, however, that pro-
vided appropriate parameter values are selected for the prevailing conditions the use of these modelling
simplifications is adequate for the goals of safety assessment /McKinley and Scholtis 1993, NEA 2001a,
Alexander et al. 2003/.
As outlined in Section 2.1, the sorption of any particular radionuclide is strongly dependent on mineral-
ogy, the accessible sorptive surface area, and groundwater composition which here is taken to include
the concentration of the radionuclide itself. The mineralogy and the accessible sorptive surface area of
the rock may, for all practical purposes, be assumed to be temporally invariant over the timescale of
safety assessment although there may be significant spatial variation within the rock both perpendicular
to the surfaces of flow-bearing fractures as well as along advective transport paths. As previously men-
tioned in Section 2.3.1, only the material property variability along the length of an advective flowpath
is considered in SR-Site and variation perpendicular to the fracture surfaces is neglected.
There are a number of reasons why a constant partitioning coefficient is attractive to use in safety
assessment modelling. The conditionally constant Kd approach describes solute partitioning as a
linear process. Linear systems are convenient to work with, as it is frequently possible to obtain
closed-form analytical solutions for the coupled transport and sorption problem. Spatial variations
in material properties along a transport path can usually be handled by convolution of residence
time distribution functions for individual hydrogeologic and material units. Similar techniques can
be used when using particle tracking methods or Laplace space formulated approaches to achieve
the same end. Additionally, the influence of different scenarios of near-field release may be easily
calculated by convolution of the near-field release boundary condition with the far-field residence
time distribution obtained by simulating the breakthrough characteristics of an instantaneous pulse
release. This is not possible to do with a non-linear formulation of sorption chemistry.
Although not sufficiently good reason on its own, the hydrological setting of safety assessment studies
is frequently sufficiently complex that it is very difficult to simultaneously integrate a highly sophis-
ticated treatment of sorption chemistry and hydrogeological processes. Perhaps more importantly, the
inherent non-linearity of mechanistically based chemistry sub-modules makes it exceedingly difficult
to distinguish between real non-linear phenomena and spurious numerical artefacts in fully-coupled
reactive transport codes. Coupled models using a simplified linear approach to sorption chemistry
are thus more transparent and results are more easily understood than approaches involving highly
non-linear models of sorption. The number of spatial discretisations and the size of time steps required
to obtain a meaningful solution is significantly constrained by considerations of stability and numeri-
cal dispersion that can give rise to non-physical phenomena if not handled properly. For sorbing
substances, many pore volumes of water must be transported through the system to give even a small
spatial redistribution of the sorbed substance. For simulations intending to simulate the chemical evo-
lution of a rock volume over timescales of up to 100 ka and more, this also leads to the requirement
of an excessive number of simulation time steps which reduces the realistically achievable number
of stochastic realisations when making probabilistic calculations.
The use of more sophisticated models of sorption chemistry does not automatically mean more accurate
results, since this is dependent on the robustness of the additional model parameters and their applicabil-
ity to the system being modelled. If the model parameters are poorly constrained by experimental data,
are derived for very different conditions of chemistry and mineralogy, or if the data have been incor-
rectly interpreted then any additional features derived from a more complex model may not necessarily
represent physically meaningful behaviour. Moreover, there is a tendency to automatically believe the
legitimacy of the results of more complex models over simpler modelling approaches purely for the
reason that they possibly represent a more mechanistically correct description of sorption.
Although there have been considerable advances in recent years in the use of thermodynamic
sorption models describing sorption processes on complex, heterogeneous substrates (see e.g. /NEA
2005/), there are still sufficiently large uncertainties and gaps in the availability of data for relevant
materials and radionuclides that precludes their direct use in safety assessment studies for fractured



38                                                                                                  R-10-48
crystalline rock. Even in the more limited role of guiding the selection of conditional Kd values for
safety assessment, large uncertainties reduce the applicability of thermodynamic sorption models for
the most safety critical radionuclides.
As outlined previously in /Crawford et al. 2006/, a powerful argument for the use of the constant Kd
approach in safety assessment is that a large amount of the uncertainty relating to the magnitude of
sorption is concentrated into a single variable, the applicability of which can be (at least partially)
assessed independently of its implementation in a transport simulation code. Moreover, the retarda-
tion implied by the magnitude of the Kd value for the particular radionuclide of concern has a power-
ful significance, as it is possible to attach a precise physical interpretation to its meaning. This is not
always possible to achieve with non-linear, mechanistic approaches, as their physical interpretation
(i.e. in terms of intrinsic binding constants, etc.) is often unclear with respect to solute retardation.
Since the aim of safety assessment is to assess radiological risks associated with different scenarios of
repository evolution, it is not always necessary or desirable to attempt to simulate sorption processes
exactly as they would occur in nature. This is largely due to the significantly increased likelihood of
introducing serious errors when attempting to model processes with this precision when such features
cannot be realistically validated in the system under consideration. Many of the features of the more
sophisticated sorption models, however, can be reasonably anticipated and Kd values selected which
over-predict radiological consequences in a cautious fashion.
Great care must be exercised nevertheless since what might seem a pessimistic estimate of the
retention strength and capacity will possibly underestimate the load of radionuclides available upon
remobilisation resulting from changes in chemical or physicochemical conditions. If an excessively
low Kd value (although pessimistically estimated for retention) is used, for example, the actual amount
of radionuclide that is remobilised may be subsequently underestimated owing to that it may have
diffused to a greater depth in the rock matrix than if a larger Kd value were to have been selected.
Changes in groundwater chemistry may additionally result in anion-exclusion, solute lock-in (reduced
out-diffusion of an anionic radionuclide due to anion exclusion effects), or increased impact of surface
diffusion for radionuclides that sorb by ion-exchange or outer-sphere surface complexation. In such
situations, the peak load and the timing of the release of radionuclides may be erroneously predicted
with possibly negative consequences for safety assessment risk metrics.
Generally, the non-linear processes of interest fall into four distinct categories:
•   Intrinsic non-linearity relating to the concentration of the radionuclide itself giving rise to
    Langmuir-like behaviour in the sorption isotherm,
•   Non-linearity relating to temporal changes in groundwater chemistry resulting in altered sorptiv-
    ity of the transported radionuclide (i.e. due to direct and indirect competitive effects, etc.),
•   Non-linearity arising due to the concentration of the transported radionuclide locally influencing
    the groundwater chemistry itself and thereby its own sorptivity,
•   Influences of temporal changes in groundwater chemistry on coupled transport properties,
    principally surface diffusion and anion-exclusion.
In each of the first two categories outlined above, it is generally not necessary to use a complex model of
sorption since a constant Kd value can always be selected which is cautious with regard to the radionu-
clide concentration (determined by the source term or the background concentration of a naturally occur-
ring isotope) and prevailing groundwater composition (established by independent hydrogeochemical
modelling). Provided the Kd value is equal to or lower than that expected for the maximum possible
radionuclide concentration and most unfavourable groundwater composition possible, the transport of
radionuclide will be pessimistically overpredicted.
The third category of non-linearity is more difficult to predict a priori since it depends on a more compli-
cated feedback mechanism by way of the mutual interaction of the radionuclide with other groundwater
constituents. For most radionuclides, however, the transported concentration is usually vanishingly small
relative to the concentration of other groundwater constituents that govern the groundwater chemistry
and this non-linearity can usually be neglected. A possible exception to this is in the case of redox sensi-
tive radionuclides such as uranium where the concentration in the immediate proximity of the source is
sufficiently high that it may promote more strongly reducing conditions and thereby self-limit its own



R-10-48                                                                                                  39
migration due the significantly lower solubility of the reduced form. This, however, can be taken into
consideration already in the formulation of the source term and does not strictly need to be considered
downstream along a transport path.
Although the fourth category of non-linearity is associated with coupled transport properties rather
than sorptivity per se, it is of great relevance to the current discussion since it has a direct impact on the
validity of the assumption of caution underlying the choice of Kd value to be used in safety assessment
modelling. This generally must be handled on a case by case basis. For the scenarios of repository
evolution considered in SR-Site, however, it is thought that the selection of Kd values for the most
unfavourable groundwater compositions anticipated is the most cautious choice /SKB 2010c/.



2.4        Parameter variability and uncertainty
2.4.1 Conceptual uncertainty concerning the Kd modelling approach
The conditionally constant Kd approach, being the simplest representation of sorption, is subject
to a great many limitations and there are a number of caveats imposed on its usage. As discussed
previously in Section 2.3.2, there are several reasons why the Kd approach is favoured over the more
sophisticated semi-empirical and mechanistic models that might be available. Generally speaking,
the Kd value is simply a statement of the expected equilibrium ratio of sorbed and dissolved solute
for a given set of conditions and is not necessarily related to considerations of any specific sorption
mechanism or retention process. The use of a constant Kd value in safety assessment modelling,
however, implies a retention process with particular characteristics that is combined with a model of
advective and diffusive mass transfer to give a quantitative measure of solute transport retardation.
For this reason it is very important that the magnitude of the Kd value selected to represent the
retardation process correctly captures the physics of the postulated retention mechanism.
The conceptual uncertainty related to the use of a constant Kd, however, also extends to the interpre-
tation of laboratory data used to establish its magnitude. This is a significantly more difficult type of
uncertainty to handle owing to that if processes giving rise to retention in laboratory investigations
are incorrectly identified as sorption, this can invalidate the subsequent modelling of transport retar-
dation. Although such reaction mechanisms are frequently favourable as additional retardation pro-
cesses over and above that provided by purely sorptive interactions, the danger of these confounding
processes is that they scale differently with regard to the physics of sorptive retardation modelled in
safety assessment transport calculations. Great care is generally taken in laboratory investigations to
avoid situations where confounding factors might skew the interpretation of sorptive retention. This
is generally achieved by using extremely low trace concentrations of radionuclides and designing
experiments to avoid situations where abrupt changes in solution chemistry might occur. Such
processes, however, are very difficult to control for and in most cases there is still some residual
uncertainty concerning the true nature of the retention process as it is quantified. With regard to the
forward modelling of sorption, the use of a conditionally constant Kd value is usually contingent
upon the following conditions being fulfilled.
•    The modelled process is a true equilibrium sorption process.
•    The water chemistry, mineralogy, and physical state of the in situ rock are identical to those used
     in partitioning coefficient data acquisition and do not vary in time and space (as noted previously,
     certain classes of spatial variation are allowed as long they are quantified by way of flowpath
     averaging or some equivalent approach).
•    The radionuclide concentration range encountered along the transport path must not invalidate
     the fundamental assumption of intrinsic sorption linearity.
Ordinarily it is not possible to fully satisfy these criteria in safety assessment and expert judgement
needs to be exercised in the selection of Kd ranges that cover uncertainties arising due to the criteria
not being fully met. The following paragraphs give a brief overview of how this is handled in SR-Site.




40                                                                                                    R-10-48
Assumption of equilibrium sorption
For solutes where retention is primarily governed by ion-exchange or surface complexation, sorption
is generally reversible in a thermodynamic sense although reaction kinetic and diffusive disequilibrium
effects are frequently mistaken as evidence of irreversibility. Exceptions to this do occur although
typically only when the radionuclide is incorporated into the mineral structure in some way that inhibits
subsequent desorption. Notwithstanding this, however, any difference in the chemical kinetics of sorption
and desorption might need to be considered if the timescales of these processes are sufficiently large
relative to the characteristic times associated with advective and diffusive transport. In most cases of
relevance for safety assessment, the intrinsic reaction rates are fast and chemical kinetics can be safely
neglected without introducing significant errors (formation of solid solutions being a possible exception).


Assumption of constant and identical material properties
In general, it is highly unlikely that groundwater chemistry, mineralogy, and the physical state of the
rock are the same as those under which Kd data are acquired. For this reason it is necessary to intro-
duce correction factors of various kinds to account for these differences. A large part of the subsequent
chapters of this report is devoted to the extrapolation of laboratory derived data to Kd values that are
considered appropriate for modelled safety assessment conditions. The procedures used to achieve
this are described in Chapter 5.
Although the use of a constant Kd value is contingent upon constant material properties, it is possible
to handle spatial variability by assigning a conditional Kd value that represents the average sorptive
properties of the rock encountered along a flowpath. This can be shown to be robust for certain classes
of material property variability and is discussed further in Section 2.4.2. Temporal variability and
associated uncertainties, however, result in non-linearities that are difficult to account for in a simple
fashion. Various issues related to this and how it is handled in SR-Site are discussed in Section 2.4.3.


Assumption of sorption isotherm linearity
The sorption isotherms for most radionuclides of interest in safety assessment exhibit some kind
of intrinsic non-linearity. These are mostly described as having a convex isotherm whereby higher
aqueous concentrations of solute are associated with reduced sorption relative to that at lower solute
concentrations. These are frequently described as being Langmuirian in character, where there is a
fixed upper limit to the monolayer surface loading of solute that can be achieved by sorptive interac-
tions. Where there are different types and abundances of sorption binding sites, these non-linearities
can appear at relatively low concentrations and be related to the successive saturation of different
binding sites at different concentrations. This gives rise to perceptible non-linearity over a broad
range of concentrations without actually reaching an upper limit until very high concentrations are
reached. For a radionuclide pulse release scenario, the convex form of the isotherm generally gives
rise to a sharpening of the sorption front leading edge and a broadening of the trailing edge.
It is always possible, however, to identify an intermediate concentration between that of the source and
the natural background level that will define an appropriate Kd value that gives a cautious estimate of
the sorption front velocity and, consequently, the rate of radionuclide transport (all other things being
equal). Since the source concentrations of most sorbing radionuclides are expected to be very low,
the relevant concentration level is, in most cases, the background concentration of isotopes for those
radionuclides that have naturally occurring counterparts in the groundwater. For radionuclides that
do not have naturally occurring isotopes, the source concentration will define the most pessimistic Kd
value for a convex isotherm. Although source concentrations are not specifically estimated for use in
defining Kd values for radionuclide transport in SR-Site, the recommended Kd values are generally
based on sorption data obtained at relevant background concentration levels or at concentrations equal
to or higher than what would be reasonably expected in the repository environment.


2.4.2 Spatial variability and uncertainty
It has been previously shown /SKB 2004/ that the material properties of the rock as represented by
the NMPG (Equation 2-44) can be integrated along a flowpath in a simple fashion to calculate a flow-
path average. This considerably simplifies calculations involving material properties which exhibit



R-10-48                                                                                                  41
spatial variability along a flowpath. To the extent that material properties are assumed to be constant
along the direction of matrix diffusion, although variable along the length of a flowpath, this can also
be shown to hold for the case of a rock matrix of limited extent.
Spatial variability can be handled in a number of different ways: by calculating a flowpath average
Kd value, by convolution of residence time distributions for different segments of a transport path
considered separately, or by explicit consideration of spatially resolved material properties in
particle tracking methods. These different approaches, however, can be shown to give theoretically
identical results and the choice is one of merely algorithmic convenience. Uncertainty in spatial
variability of material properties is handled in SR-Site by stochastic simulations where a range of
values representing an interval of the uncertainty distribution of Kd is randomly sampled and used in
probabilistic simulations. As an addition to probabilistic simulations, deterministic calculations are
performed using a central best estimate value of Kd.
For sorbing solutes, Kd is usually considerably larger than the porewater storage term, θm/ρs and the latter
can therefore generally be neglected. If the spatially variable De and Kd can be reasonably assumed to be
independent lognormal variables, the product of the flowpath mean De and Kd can be shown to be equal
to the mean of the spatially resolved product of De and Kd. This would suggest that the appropriate flow-
path average measure of Kd is then the arithmetic mean of the distribution describing spatial variability.
On the basis of this analysis, the arithmetic mean would therefore be recommended for use in determin-
istic calculations if the probability distribution for Kd can be shown to be dominated by spatial variabil-
ity. In the data compilation prepared for SR-Site, however, uncertainty is by far the dominant feature of
the empirically derived data sets and it is therefore not possible to defend the use of a simple arithmetic
mean Kd as a flowpath average for modelling purposes. For this reason, the median of the uncertainty
distribution is selected as the most appropriate best estimate Kd value for use in deterministic calcula-
tions. For a lognormally distributed variable, the median is numerically less than the arithmetic mean
and therefore can be defended as a more cautious choice for the best estimate value.


2.4.3 Temporal variability and uncertainty
Temporal variability is difficult to handle in a conditionally constant Kd framework owing to non-lin-
earity introduced in the solute mass balance as a result of changing sorptivity. Geological weathering
processes are sufficiently slow under normal repository conditions that any changes in rock mineral-
ogy can be neglected over the timescale of the safety assessment. Changes in sorptivity resulting from
variable groundwater chemistry, however, do occur over time and can have a significant impact on
radionuclide migration rates. Groundwater chemistry can be expected to show considerable variation
both spatially and temporally in the repository environment. During a glacial cycle these changes are
driven by different processes; infiltration of meteoric water in combination with land uplift during the
(interglacial) temperate period and alternating short duration pulses of dilute, glacial melt water and
upconing of deep saline groundwater during glacial advance and retreat. During the phase in which
the ice sheet is stable over the repository, the flow of water may be very slow or stagnant.
As a general rule, the temperate period is characterised by a slow freshening of the groundwater
surrounding the repository over many thousands of years under the influence of infiltrating meteoric
water. During this period, the groundwater evolves towards lower pH levels and higher carbonate
concentrations. This is also likely to result in a steady increase in the redox potential over time.
The intruding meteoric water displaces saline water in the fracture system and mixes by diffusive
exchange with stagnant water in the rock matrix. Changes in groundwater salinity are slow and
follow a similar pattern to the residence time distribution function for non-sorbing solutes as
predicted by Equation 2-45 (since they are subject to the same delay mechanisms as transported
radionuclides). Since many of the components characterising the freshness of groundwater are
practically non-sorbing, this implies that the freshening groundwater composition will catch up to
and overtake the sorption fronts of many migrating radionuclides given sufficient time.
Depending on the F-factor associated with the recharge/discharge flow path passing through the
repository, it may take many hundreds of years up to some tens of thousands of years for the mixing
front to reach repository depth. At the time when it does reach the repository, the effective width
of the mixing front (say, the distance spanning the 10% and 90% mixing fractions) will then be
as much as twice the recharge path length to the surface (for further details refer to Appendix A in


42                                                                                                  R-10-48
/Crawford and Sidborn 2009/). This implies a very slow change in groundwater chemistry which, for
ion-exchanging radionuclides might be expected to lead to steadily increasing sorptivity. In the case
of non redox-sensitive radionuclides that form surface complexes, the changing groundwater com-
position may lead to increased or decreased sorptivity depending on the changing pH and carbonate
levels and the sorption reaction characteristics of the radionuclide concerned. For redox sensitive
radionuclides, the increasing carbonate content of the groundwater may lead to an increasing redox
potential (Eh) and thus reduced sorptivity.
In the phase of the glacial cycle during which the ice sheet is stable over the repository, the flow of
water may be very slow or stagnant owing to the approximately constant hydraulic head under the
ice sheet. At this time, permafrost may also extend to a significant depth in the rock and hinder the
flow of water. The freezing of water in the fracture system may result in the rejection of salt and
formation of cryogenic brines around the repository volume, although this is not certain. During this
phase, sorptivity may be increased or decreased depending on the properties of individual radionu-
clides and the actual groundwater composition. Owing to the low flow conditions, reducing condi-
tions are likely to prevail possibly resulting in a lower mobility of redox sensitive radionuclides. The
low flow conditions in the repository volume during this phase, however, means that this is of only
minor importance for safety assessment purposes and can be neglected.
During glacial retreat, alternating pulses of dilute glacial melt water and deep saline groundwater may
intrude into the repository volume. These pulses, however, are expected to be relatively short in dura-
tion (a few hundred years) and accompanied by significantly increased flowrates giving a large dilution
effect. The relative impact of these intermittent periods of high flow and altered chemistry depends on
the form of the radionuclide source term although their limited duration also restricts the amount of
already mobilised radionuclide that can diffuse back into the fracture system from the rock matrix. The
overall effect is expected to be negligible although can be bounded in safety assessment by estimating
the overall dose contribution during these periods under the assumption of weakened or zero sorption.
The fact that the glacial ice front at this time is close to the repository and that the site might possibly
be submerged below sea level also needs to be considered here since this has a large bearing on the
landscape dose factors and the relative levels of radiological risk at such times.
As is discussed in later sections, it is not currently possible to make robust quantitative predictions
of whether the sorption of surface complexing radionuclides should increase or decrease in response
to altered groundwater composition. This is largely due to the absence of reliable surface complexa-
tion models for the sorption of these solutes on granitic rock types. For radionuclides that sorb
predominantly by ion-exchange and are thus sensitive to groundwater salinity, modelling can be used
to approximately assess relative changes in sorptivity at different times since a rudimentary model of
ion-exchange on granite does exist. This is discussed further in Chapter 5.
It was not considered feasible in SR-Site to track detailed spatial and temporal changes in ground-
water chemistry along radionuclide migration pathlines associated with specific source locations
(i.e. individual canister deposition positions). Even if this was accomplished, the current lack of
reliable mechanistic models of radionuclide sorption would limit the value of such information. For
this reason it is only strictly possible to consider relative variations between different time periods
for the full groundwater composition distribution in the repository volume when making judgements
on the influence of spatial and temporal variability or uncertainty in groundwater chemistry. It is
also noted that it is very difficult to separate notions of variability and uncertainty when considering
groundwater chemistry given that; 1) changes can occur relatively rapidly on the timescale of
sorbing radionuclide transport, and 2) groundwater chemistry profiles are established on the basis of
hydrogeological simulations that also harbour a number of assumptions and uncertainties.
Acknowledging this restriction, spatial variability and uncertainty of groundwater chemical composition
is considered to be a sub-component of overall Kd data uncertainty. Calculations made for the elements
where it is possible to approximately estimate the influence of groundwater composition (specifically
Cs, Sr, Ra, and possibly Ni) indicate that the impact of variable/uncertain groundwater composition is,
in any case, relatively minor in comparison to the overall empirical data uncertainty and therefore does
not need to be considered in detail. For these solutes, Kd uncertainty distributions are given for the most
unfavourable hydrochemical conditions expected during repository groundwater evolution. Although not
a strictly correct manner of handling the non-linear effects of evolving groundwater composition, for the
purposes of SR-Site this is considered to be the most cautious approach to handling such uncertainties.


R-10-48                                                                                                  43
For surface complexing solutes it is generally not possible at the present time to relate quantitative or
even qualitative changes in sorptivity in a robust fashion between different contact solution composi-
tions used in sorption experiments. The reason for this is explained more fully in Chapter 5 although
relates to insufficient tracking and documentation of contact solution chemistry during the course of
the sorption experiments that have been used to derive the recommended Kd data. For this reason, it
is assumed that the aggregate set of Kd values obtained for different contact solution compositions
also spans the range of uncertainty that might arise due to variable or uncertain groundwater compo-
sition in the repository environment (and any temporal changes). In practice this means pooling data
obtained for different contact solution compositions. For solutes where Kd data are available for a
number of different groundwater end-members, this is not an unreasonable assumption. For solutes
where data are only available for one or two different groundwater compositions the assumption is
likely to be less good. This is discussed on a case by case basis in the appendices to this report.




44                                                                                               R-10-48
3            Description of prioritised radionuclides


3.1          Radionuclides of importance for SR-Site
The radionuclides that are considered of importance for SR-Site fall into three different categories of
relative importance depending on how they appear in the safety assessment calculations. For nuclides
listed as important, accurate sorption data are required since they are expected to be released from
damaged canisters and will migrate through the geosphere with flowing groundwater. For nuclides
listed as being of minor importance, accurate sorption data is of less significance on account of their
very short half-lives. These nuclides do, however, contribute significantly to calculated dose rates in
the case of, for example, a repository intrusion scenario and therefore cannot be entirely neglected.
Nuclides listed as inventory only, are not important for geosphere transport calculations although
they are used to establish inventories of daughter nuclides generated by decay processes. The full list
of radionuclides and their classifications are given in Table 3-1 and are taken from the Radionuclide
transport report /SKB 2010d/.

Table 3-1. List of radionuclides considered of significance for SR-Site safety assessment calcula-
tions /SKB 2010d/.

Important                          Minor importance                 Inventory only
Nuclide          Half-life (y)     Nuclide          Half-life (y)   Nuclide          Half-life (y)

Fission and activation products:
C-14             5.73×103          Ag-108m            4.18×102
Cl-36            3.01×10   5
                                   Cd-113m            1.41×101
Cs-135           2.30×10   6
                                   Eu-152             1.35×101
Cs-137           3.01×10   1
                                   H-3                1.23×101
I-129            1.57×10   7
                                   Ho-166m            1.20×103
Nb-94            2.03×10   4
                                   Mo-93              4.00×103
Ni-59            7.60×10   4
                                   Nb-93m             1.61×101
Se-79            1.13×10   6
                                   Ni-63              1.00×102
Sn-126           1.00×10   5
                                   Sm-151             9.00×101
Pd-107           6.50×10   6
                                   Sn-121m            5.50×101
Sr-90            2.87×10   1


Tc-99            2.11×105
Zr-93            1.53×106

Actinides:
4n decay chain (thorium series)
Pu-240           6.56×103          Cm-244             1.81×101
Th-232           1.41×1010
U-236            2.34×107
4n+1 (neptunium series)
Cm-245           8.50×103          Pu-241             1.44×101      U-237            1.85×10–2
Am-241           4.32×102                                           Pa-233           7.38×10–2
Np-237           2.14×106
U-233            1.59×105
Th-229           7.34×103
4n+2 (radium series)
Cm-246           4.73×103          Am-242m            1.41×102      Am-242           1.83×10–3
Pb-210           2.23×101          Pu-238             8.77×101      Cm-242           4.46×10–1
Pu-242           3.73×105                                           Np-238           5.80×10–3
Ra-226           1.60×103                                           Th-234           6.60×10–2
Th-230           7.54×104                                           Pa-234m          2.22×10–6
U-238            4.47×109
U-234            2.46×105




R-10-48                                                                                              45
Important                        Minor importance                 Inventory only
Nuclide          Half-life (y)   Nuclide          Half-life (y)   Nuclide          Half-life (y)

4n+3 (actinium series)
Am-243           7.37×103        Cm-243             2.91×101      Np-239           6.45×10-3
Pu-239           2.41×10   4


U-235            7.04×108
Pa-231           3.28×104
Ac-227           2.18×101




3.2         Data sources and correlations
Table 3-2 summarises the different elements and redox states that are considered of relevance for
safety assessment calculations in SR-Site. The table also itemises the predominant aqueous species
expected for the average groundwater composition projected during repository evolution. In cases
where several species are predicted to be present in nearly equimolar concentrations, multiple
species have been given in estimated order of relative importance. The table furthermore indicates
which sorption mechanism is expected to be controlling radionuclide retention as well as the data
source or geochemical analogy invoked where appropriate. Two broad correlation groups are also
defined which essentially indicate whether the Kd values appears to exhibit a predominant sensitivity
to ionic strength (ion-exchange and outer-sphere surface complexes) or pH and carbonate concentra-
tion (mostly inner-sphere surface complexes). Solutes belonging to the same correlation group are
expected to be influenced in a similar fashion by uncertain or changing groundwater composition; a
feature which is important to consider in stochastic risk calculations. It is acknowledged that this is
only a very approximate treatment of correlation given that radionuclides, particularly those featur-
ing possibly mixed sorption mechanisms, may be influenced by ionic strength as well as pH and
carbonate to varying degrees and it is very difficult to introduce rigid demarcations between related
groups of elements.
In this compilation, Kd data are obtained from a mixture of sources including the Forsmark and
Laxemar site investigations and literature data. Correlations in sorptivity are assumed in the assign-
ment of Kd ranges for elements where no data are available (so-called geochemical analogies). The
use of analogue solutes in place of actual data is based on geochemical similarity and consideration
of specific reaction mechanisms. It should be noted that certain geochemical analogies indicated in
Table 3-2 may be considered of dubious standing although are necessary owing to a lack of data.
This appears to be unavoidable at the present time, although generally affects elements that are not
of central importance for the safety case involving migration in the geosphere (e.g. Ag and Cd).
The correlation groups given in Table 3-2 are recommended to assist in the stochastic selection of Kd
values for use in transport calculations. It is expected, for example, that Kd values for ion exchanging
solutes will be mutually correlated with ionic strength. Similarly, for cations that sorb by way of an
inner sphere surface complexation mechanism, any shift in hydrochemical conditions should give
rise to similar impacts on sorption (although not necessarily in equal proportionality) for all solutes
that have an analogous reaction chemistry. An exception is made for redox sensitive solutes since
the transition from reducing to oxidising forms occurs at different Eh threshold levels for different
elements. Uranium, for example, could possibly be present in oxidised form while plutonium, nep-
tunium, and technetium might still remain in reduced form at the redox potentials projected during
the SR-Site temperate period. Correlations between these elements should therefore be handled on a
case by case basis.




46                                                                                                 R-10-48
Table 3-2. List of data sources and geochemical analogies used for specific elements considered
in the prioritised list of radionuclides for SR-Site. The identity of most likely dominant aqueous
species and presumed sorption binding mechanism (class) is also given where appropriate.
For certain solutes it is not possible to say which sorption mechanism is dominant and these
are thus labelled as having a “mixed” mechanism. Two correlation groups are also defined for
stochastic simulations – these are; (1) Kd predominantly correlated with ionic strength; (2) Kd
predominantly correlated with pH and carbonate concentration. A further distinction is made
between groups labelled (2a) and (2b) on account of the exceptionally strong analogy between
the trivalent actinides and lanthanides although both groups are expected to be influenced in a
similar fashion by pH and/or carbonate concentration to varying degrees. Substances labelled
with (–) are assumed to not exhibit any correlations on account of their low sorptivity.

Element        Corr. Group    Redox State    Dominant species            Class   Status

Alkali and alkaline earth metals
Cs              1              +1            Cs+                         IX      site specific data
Ra              1              +2            Ra2+                        IX      site specific data
Sr              1              +2            Sr2+                        IX      site specific data

Actinides
Eu             2a             +3             EuCO3+                      IS      site specific data
Ho             2a             +3             HoCO3+                      IS      Am(III)/Eu(III) analogy
Sm             2a             +3             SmCO3+                      IS      Am(III)/Eu(III) analogy

Lanthanides
Ac             2a             +3             AcCO3+                      IS      Am(III)/Eu(III) analogy
Am             2a             +3             AmCO3+                      IS      site specific data
Cm             2a             +3             CmCO3+                      IS      Am(III)/Eu(III) analogy
Np             2b             +4             Np(OH)4                     IS      Pu(IV) analogy
               2b             +5             NpO2+, NpO2CO3–             IS      site specific data
Pa             2b             +4             Pa(OH)4                     IS      literature data
               2b             +5             PaO2(OH)                    IS      literature data
Pu             2a             +3             PuOH2+, Pu3+                IS      Am(III)/Eu(III) analogy
               2b             +4             Pu(OH)4                     IS      literature data
               2b             +5             PuO2+                       IS      literature data
               2b             +6             PuO2(CO3)22–, PuO2CO3       IS      literature data
Th             2b             +4             Th(OH)3CO3–                 IS      Pu(IV) analogy
U              2b             +4             U(OH)4                      IS      with Pu(IV) analogy
               2b             +6             UO2(CO3)34–, UO2(CO3)22–    IS      site specific data

Transition elements
Ni             1              +2             Ni2+, NiCl+                 Mixed   site specific data
Zr             2b             +4             Zr(OH)5–                    IS      literature data
Ag             1              +1             AgCl2–, AgCl43–, AgCl32–    Mixed   Cs(I) analogy
Cd             1              +2             CdCl+, Cd2+, CdCl2          Mixed   Ni(II) analogy
Pb             2b             +2             PbCO3, PbCl+, PbOH+, Pb2+   IS      literature data
Pd             2b             +2             Pd(OH)2                     IS      literature data
Mo             –              +6             MoO42–                      –       assumed non–sorbing
Nb             2b             +5             NbO3–, Nb(OH)5              IS      literature data
Tc             2b             +4             TcO(OH)2                    IS      Pu(IV) analogy
               –              +7             TcO4–                       –       assumed non–sorbing

Other
C              –              +4             HCO3–                       –       assumed non–sorbing
               –              –4             CH4 (or organic acids)      –       assumed non–sorbing
Cl             –              –1             Cl–                         –       assumed non–sorbing
I              –              –1             I–                          –       assumed non–sorbing
Se             –              –2             HSe–                        IS      literature data
               –              +4             HSeO3–, SeO32–              IS      literature data
               –              +6             SeO42–                      IS      literature data
Sn             2b             +4             Sn(OH)2                     IS      literature data

Notes:    IX (denotes sorption by ion-exchange)
          IS (denotes sorption by inner sphere surface complexation)
          Mixed (denotes sorption by a possibly mixed mechanism)



R-10-48                                                                                                    47
3.2.1 Overview of geochemical analogies and periodic trends
With regard to the use of analogue elements for radionuclides where no data are available, considera-
tion must be given to the individual thermodynamic properties of the solutes concerned. For
radionuclides that sorb by an ion-exchange mechanism, sorptive strength is correlated with hydrated
ionic radius thereby giving rise to the so-called lyotropic series where sorptivity of isovalent cations
follows the approximate order:
Ra2+ > Ba2+ > Sr2+ > Ca2+ > Mg2+
Ag+ > Cs+ > K+ > Na+ > Li+ > H+
The lyotropic series is considered to be more or less universally applicable for many different min-
eral surfaces although there are some deviations for certain clay minerals that have poorly hydrated
interlayers. The mechanistic explanation for the lyotropic series is typically framed in terms of the
force of electrostatic attraction between the surface and the cation and the limitation imposed by how
closely hydrated cations of various sizes can approach the surface. This is essentially Coulombs’
law of electrostatic attraction where the force between two charges can be shown to be proportional
to the inverse square distance of separation. Cations with large hydration spheres are therefore only
held weakly relative to cations with small hydration spheres.
Although a physically appealing description, this explanation breaks down when one considers that
cations do not always retain their hydration sphere during sorption. This is particularly the case for
sorption of cations on clay interlayer surfaces where loss of the hydration sphere is often required
for sorption to occur. In fact, loss of the hydration sphere sometimes gives rise to the formation of
effectively inner sphere surface complexes even though the cations may be sorbed by nominally
electrostatic interactions. A modified explanation was put forward by /Eisenman 1962/ which
extends the description by recognising that ion-exchange is partly electrostatic in nature (as outlined
above), but also involves a change in free energy associated with modification of the hydration
sphere surrounding the cation as it approaches a surface. Various enhancements in the description of
ion-exchange have been proposed by a number of researchers. A concept that has gained increasing
popularity is based on the HSAB concept of hard and soft acids and bases (see, e.g /Xu and Harsh
1990/ and references therein) which specifically allows for inner-sphere sorption processes. In a
revised mechanistic description proposed by /Teppen and Miller 2006/, cation-exchange is described
as a two-phase partitioning phenomena whereby the cation with the lower hydration energy is
thermodynamically preferred as a surface sorbed species while the more strongly hydrated cation is
preferred in the aqueous phase.
Although specific details of these different conceptual models are of interest for mechanistic model-
ling, they are less edifying for the purposes of the present discussion where the focus is upon iden-
tifying the most appropriate geochemical analogues for the sorption of specific radionuclides. What
this description should therefore convey to the reader is the fact that there is currently no unifying
theory that provides an all encompassing description of ion-exchange phenomena in a satisfactory
fashion and there is much overlap with concepts of surface complexation which are typically cast in
a completely different conceptual framework.
When discussing hydration properties of ions it is customary to speak in terms of the ratio of the
square of the charge number and the ion radius, ζ = Z 2 / r (this is also referred to as the electrostatic
index). The free energy of hydration and consequently the logarithm of the equilibrium constant for
the first hydrolysis reaction is known to be approximately proportional to the electrostatic index
although an empirical correction is required for strongly electronegative elements. Generally the lyo-
tropic series is ordered in terms of increasing electrostatic index. To establish a qualitative order of
relative sorptivities on geological materials it is important to also consider concentration effects via
the mass action equations describing the ion-exchange equilibria in groundwater which sometimes
can have counterintuitive effects on sorption isotherms. It also should be recognised that certain
cations (particularly for the divalent transition element cations, Pb2+, Cd2+, Ni2+) can, in principle,
also form covalently bonded inner sphere surface complexes which makes ranking these solutes in
order of ion-exchange sorptivity speculative if the possibility of multiple binding mechanisms is not
considered.




48                                                                                                R-10-48
It has been known for some time that intrinsic constants for surface complexation reactions can be
related to analogous reactions occurring in the aqueous phase by way of so-called linear free energy
relations, or LFER (see e.g. /Langmuir 1997/ and references therein). An interesting consequence
of this analogy is that sorptivity is predicted to increase with hydration energy for a sorbing cation.
This is the opposite of the correlation described for ion-exchange reactions as outlined above. The
aqueous phase and analogue surface complexation reactions are:
Mz++ nH2O # M(OH)nz–n + nH+			(n = 1, 2)			                                              (3-1)
Mz++ >OH + nH2O # >OM(OH)nz–1 + nH+		                (n = 1, 2)			                       (3-2)
These are typically presented in graphical form where the logarithm of the intrinsic sorption constant
is plotted against the logarithm of the corresponding aqueous hydrolysis reaction. The technique has
been used by /Bradbury and Baeyens 2005b/ to model sorption of a number of divalent transition
metals and trivalent actinides on montmorillonite (bentonite) and more recently for illite /Bradbury
and Baeyens 2009b/.
In spite of the apparent success of this technique, the relation between the hydrolysis reaction of a
given cation and its corresponding inner-sphere surface complexation reaction is contingent on the
reaction being a simple monomolecular binding reaction with a protonated or deprotonated surface
hydroxyl group as outlined in Equation 3-2. The theoretical relationship does not give any additional
information on whether the postulated surface complexation mechanism is the most likely to occur.
This must usually be confirmed by independent spectroscopic evidence which, for most minerals
comprising granitic rock, is sparse or non-existent. This is of great significance for radionuclides that
are postulated to form ternary surface complexes with carbonate such as U(VI) and Np(V).
At this time it is not clear whether it is possible to derive thermodynamic correlations between aque-
ous hydroxy-carbonato complexation reactions and proposed ternary surface complexation reactions
involving carbonate owing to the somewhat different stoichiometry of the aqueous phase and postu-
lated sorption reactions (e.g. U(VI) and Np(V)). Also, in most cases there do not appear to be relevant
aqueous phase reactions recognised in the thermodynamic databases that could be used as analogies
in the same fashion. The aqueous phase reaction of Th(IV) to form the hydroxo-carbonate species,
Th(CO3)3 (OH)24– appears to be the only exception, although to the best knowledge of the author the
analogous bidentate surface complexation reaction has never been proposed in the literature.
Even though this might be the case, as a general guiding principle, it still appears to be justified to
judge the goodness of geochemical analogies by consideration of the broad similarity of their various
aqueous phase reactions which would necessarily also include reaction constants for carbonate- and
hydroxy-carbonato complex formation. This is not only due to the possibility of ternary surface
complex formation, but also because of the strong competitive influence that aqueous phase compl-
exation with carbonate ligands has upon surface complexation. Very different equilibrium constants
for the aqueous phase complexation reactions would then imply different competitive effects of
carbonate for the radionuclides being compared.
The correlation between the electrostatic index, ζ and the first hydrolysis constant, β10 is shown
in Figure 3-1. Interestingly, many of the geochemical analogies of interest for this report can be
understood at least qualitatively by examination of this figure. Generally what is found is that
isovalent solutes tend to be grouped in sequences that reflect broad similarities in their intrinsic sorp-
tive properties. Solutes that sorb by way of an ion-exchange mechanism, for example, are clustered
at the far left-hand lower corner of the figure in order of the lyotropic series. The trivalent actinides
and lanthanides are very closely clustered near the centre of the figure indicating the existence of
a very good geochemical analogy between these solutes with regard to simple surface complexes
of the hydroxo-type as given in Equation 3-2. The tetravalent actinides are less clustered, although
similarities in their intrinsic binding constants can also be inferred by way of the LFER principle.
Some deviations from known sorption properties can be seen in Figure 3-1 with regard to the
transition metals. Generally, the sorptivity of the divalent transition metals are expected to follow the
so-called Irving-Willams series (see, e.g. /Langmuir 1997/):
Cu2+ > Zn2+ > Ni2+ > Co2+ >Fe2+ > Mn2+



R-10-48                                                                                                49
            4.0
                                                                                                            Np4+
            2.0
                                                                                                                                                 Sn4+
                                                                                                          Pa4+       Pu4+
            0.0                                                                                                                           Zr4+
                                         Pd2+                                                                      U4+
                                                                                             Fe   3+

            -2.0
                                                                                                             Th4+
            -4.0
                                Fe2+                               Am3+
       o                                                                                                    Al3+
log10 β1                               Co2+
                                                     Zn2+
            -6.0
                                                            Pu3+                      Eu3+
                                Pb2+          Cu2+                                                                    Ag+
            -8.0
                                                                        Ho   3+

                         Cd2+
           -10.0                                                                                                                   Ba2+            Mg2+
                                                 Ni2+                                                                    Li+
                                                        Mn   2+
                                                                   Sm3+
                         Ag+                                                                                 Na+                            Sr2+
           -12.0                                Ca2+                                                                              Ra2+
                                                                                                                      K+
           -14.0                                                                                                   Rb+
                                                                                                                 Cs+
           -16.0

                   0.0                    5.0                      10.0                            15.0                    20.0                     25.0

                                                                                  2
                                                                    ζ = Z r [Å]

Figure 3‑1. Cross plot showing the correlation between ionic index (ζ ) and first hydrolysis constant of
various cations (given as log10 units). Approximate geochemical analogies between isovalent states can be
inferred from the proximity of different species in the figure.


Although these solutes are closely clustered in the lower left-hand side of the figure indicating
approximately analogue behaviour, the relative order of hydrolysis constants does not strictly follow
the Irving-Williams sequence which is suggestive of more complex behaviour than can be captured
by this simple tableau. Since some of these solutes (e.g. Ni2+) appear to also exhibit ionic strength
dependencies, this could be indicative of a mixed mechanism of sorption or at least approximately
equal importance of inner- and outer-sphere complexation. Interesting deviations can also be seen for
Ag+ and more particularly for Pd2+ which don’t seem to fall into line with the systematic behaviour
of other solutes in their class.
It is also interesting to note that the relative location of markers for specific solutes (i.e. ordering
of hydrolysis constants) shown in Figure 3-1 may differ slightly from other similar plots in the
literature (e.g. /Hummel et al. 2002/) depending on different literature data sources used to obtain
the hydrolysis constants. Hydrolysis constants in Figure 3-1 are taken from the SKB thermodynamic
database /Duro et al. 2006/ where available. For other solutes, the NAGRA database /Hummel et al.
2002/ has been used preferentially and for solutes not represented in either, the MINTEQ database as
distributed with the PHREEQC program has been used. Data for Co2+ was taken from /Bolzan and
Arvía 1962/. Reaction constants for the very weakly hydrolysed solutes Rb+ and Cs+ are not usually
considered important in thermodynamic modelling so these do not occur in any of the abovemen-
tioned databases. For these two solutes, Latimer’s equation /Latimer 1926/ has been used to provide
an estimate for purely comparative purposes. The trivalent actinides, Ac3+ and Cm3+ are notable by
their absence in all abovementioned thermodynamic databases and therefore have not been included
in the analysis.
As mentioned previously, the comparison of electrostatic index and first hydration constant is only
a partial representation of the reactive complexity exhibited by these solutes and consideration must
also be given to other classes of reactions if accurate geochemical analogies are to be ascertained.
For the radionuclides that can exist in trivalent and tetravalent forms, reactions involving carbonate
have been pointed out as being particularly relevant. The reactions involving carbonate are difficult
to frame in a simple graphic representation, however, owing to the variety of possible reaction
stoichiometries and clearly different predominance of various carbonate complexed species at
equilibrium.


50                                                                                                                                               R-10-48
The trivalent actinides and lanthanides have nearly identical equilibrium constants for hydrolysis
and carbonate complexation indicating similar sorptivity and impact of carbonate speciation in
groundwater. For the tetravalent actinides, equilibrium constants for hydrolysis and carbonate compl-
exation are broadly similar although there are some differences for higher order hydroxy-carbonato
complexes since not all the elements have the same diversity of recognised carbonate complexation
reactions. Of the tetravalent actinides, Th(IV) has the lowest stability constant(s) for hydrolysis indi-
cating that it should exhibit the weakest sorption and highest solubility. On the basis of their known
hydrolysis constants, Sn(IV) and Zr(IV) are predicted to have sorptivities at least as high as the
tetravalent actinides. Tc(IV) is different to the other tetravalent species since the naked cationic form
is not generally considered to exist in groundwater, although there are several recognised hydrolysis
and carbonate reactions listed in the thermodynamic databases involving the basis specie, TcO(OH)2.
Tc(IV) is thought, however, to behave in a broadly similar fashion to the other tetravalent elements.


3.2.2 Particular geochemical analogues used in this compilation
Table 3-4 lists the geochemical analogues used for the purposes of assigning data in SR-Site. Cs(I)
and Ni(II) are used as geochemical analogues for the sorption of Ag(I) and Cd(II), respectively. Both
Ag(I) and Cd(II), however, can form chloride complexes in strongly saline groundwater that might
compromise the validity of the assumed analogies given that the speciation of Cs(I) and Ni(II) is not
dominated by chloride complexation to the same degree. Also, Ag+ is a B-type cation /Ahrland et al.
1958/ which arguably makes it more closely related to Hg+ or Cu+ than Cs+. The choice of Cs(I) as
an analogue for Ag(I) here is necessitated by an absence of data for the other possible geochemical
analogues and appears to be unavoidable. The same analogy was invoked previously by /Carbol and
Engkvist 1997/ since it was deemed likely to cautiously underestimate the sorptivity of Ag(I). This
previous judgement is accepted in the current compilation as being a reasonable working assumption.
Both Ag(I) and Cd(II), however, are less important for radionuclide transport calculations due to the
very short half-lives of their relevant radioisotopes so this is not considered to be a major deficiency.

Table 3-3. Summary of relative reactive properties of different redox states of significant elements.
For ion-exchange, sorptivity is thought to be inversely related to hydrolysis constant. For surface
complexation, binding strength can be posited to be proportionally related to the hydrolysis
constant (assuming analogous behaviour for reactions with surface hydroxyl groups). Carbonate
complexation constants can signify both extent of competitive binding in the aqueous phase and
the possibility for ternary surface complex formation (Np(V) and U(VI).

Oxidation state        Relative order of reaction constants     Reaction class

I (Alkali)             Li > Na > K > Rb > Cs                    Hydrolysis


II (Alkaline earth)    Mg > Ca > Sr > Ba > Ra                   Hydrolysis


II (Transition)        Pd >> Pb >Ni > Cd                        Hydrolysis



III                    Ho > Eu > Sm > Am > Pu                   Hydrolysis
                       Eu > Ho ≈ Am > Sm > Pu                   Carbonate complexation


IV                     Sn > Pa > Pu >Np >U > Th                 Hydrolysis
                       Pu > Np > U > Th                         Carbonate complexation


V                      Np ≈ Pu                                  Hydrolysis
                       Pu > Np                                  Carbonate complexation


VI                     U > Pu                                   Hydrolysis
                       U > Pu                                   Carbonate complexation

Note: Although Li, Na, K, Rb, Mg, Ca, Ba are not radionuclides in spent fuel, as groundwater constituents they are
nonetheless important for understanding competitive ion-exchange in groundwater.




R-10-48                                                                                                              51
Table 3-4. Summary of geochemical analogues used for assigning Kd data in SR-Site (this data
compilation). Analogues of questionable validity are labelled with an asterisk (*).

Analogue species     Representing

Cs(I)                Ag(I)*
Am(III)/Eu(III)      Ho(III), Sm(III), Pu(III), Ac(III), Cm(III)
Ni(II)               Cd(II)*
Pu(IV)               Np(IV), U(IV), Th(IV), Zr(IV)*, Sn(IV)*, Tc(IV)*
Non-sorbing          Cl(-I), I(-I), C(IV,-IV), Tc(VII), Mo(VI)




Other geochemical analogues not listed in Table 3-4 have been used in an indirect fashion in this
compilation. In the model of ion-exchange which is used to predict changes in Ra(II) sorptivity in
response to groundwater salinity, for example, a geochemical analogy is assumed to exist with Ba(II)
when assigning selectivity coefficients for the ion-exchange reaction of Ra2+. Other analogies are
invoked in specific cases when assessing the reasonableness of Kd values established on the basis
of sparse literature data. The sorption of Pb(II) on granite, for example, is only reported in a single
reference and the analogue solute, Ni(II) is therefore used to assess whether the proposed Kd data are
appropriate. On the basis of this comparison, a case could be made for the use of Kd data for Ni(II) in
place of that recommended for Pb(II) sorption as a possible sensitivity analysis. This is likely to be
very pessimistic, however, given the much higher first hydrolysis constant for Pb2+ which indicates
stronger inner sphere surface complexation for Pb(II).
Most radionuclides that are predominantly speciated as anions or oxyanions are assumed to be
non-sorbing. Selenium, Se(-II,IV,VI) is an exception owing to the availability of sorption data that
indicates weak, although non-negligible sorption. Since sorption of anions should only occur on
positively charged sites, only minerals featuring point of zero charge near groundwater pH are likely
to sorb Se species. For granitic rocks, only microprecipitates of hematite in the rock matrix porosity
are likely to fall into this category (e.g. /Jan et al. 2007, 2008/). Carbonate is not expected to sorb
significantly in the rock matrix owing to its much higher concentration in groundwater. Elevated
carbonate concentrations, however, may be important for limiting the sorption of Se by direct
competition for binding sites on hematite.

3.2.3 Overview of available site specific data
During the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations, sorption was quantified on crushed bore
core samples of different representative rock types taken from each respective site. Sorption
measurements were made for Cs, Sr, Am/Eu, Ra, Ni, U, and Np which were chosen to represent a
broad spectrum of sorbing properties reflecting both ion-exchange and surface complexation binding
mechanisms. Measurements, in some cases, were made using Eu instead of Am although the data for
both elements are subsequently pooled under the assumption of geochemical analogy between the
two elements.
The sorption measurements were made using a variety of contact groundwater compositions described
as being Fresh, Marine, Saline, and Brine in character. An additional groundwater type of brackish
non-marine character was defined for the Laxemar site and is referred to in this report as Type V.
Compositions of the different groundwater types are given in Table 3-5. It should be noted that the
groundwater type described as Saline was defined with slightly different composition for the Forsmark
and Laxemar sites. These are specified as Saline (Fm) and Saline (Lx), respectively.
Although there were roughly 950 data points each for Cs, Sr, and Am/Eu sorption at the Forsmark
site, these were based on crushed rock samples from eight different borehole sections featuring three
distinct rock types. Sorption data for Ni, Ra, Np(V), and U(VI) (roughly 200 data points each) were
based on crushed rock samples from two borehole sections representing a single rock type. Similarly,
there were 1,038 data points each for Cs, Sr, and Am/Eu sorption for Laxemar site-specific rock
types. These were based on crushed rock samples from five different borehole sections featuring four
distinct rock types. Sorption data for Ni, Ra, Np(V), and U(VI) (roughly 100 data points each) were
based on crushed rock samples from one borehole section representing a single rock type.



52                                                                                              R-10-48
Table 3-5. Groundwater compositions used in sorption studies for Forsmark and Laxemar site
investigations. The compositions (mg/l) are based on groundwater sampled in specific intervals
of the indicated boreholes and are deemed to be approximately representative of the main
groundwater classes characteristic of each site.

Name         Type I          Type II        Type IIIa       Type IIIb     Type IV      Type V
Type         Fresh           Marine         Saline (Fm)     Saline (Lx)   Brine        Brackish
Borehole     HSH02           KFM02A         KFM03           KSH01A        KLX02        KLX04
Interval     0–200m          509–516m       639–646m        558–565m      1383–1392m   510–515m

Li+          0.016           0.051          0.028           0.58          4.85         0.0152
Na+          127             2 120          1 690           3 230         7450         691
K+           2.16            33.3           14.2            12.4          32.6         3.19
Rb+          (0-0252)A       0.0628         0.0393          0.0424        0.178        0.0424
Cs+          (1.17×10–3)A    1.79×10–3      7.09×10–4       1.37×10–3     0.0186       1.37×10–3
NH4+         (0-0947)A       0.04           0.204           0.04          0.56         0.0319
Mg2+         1.43            232            52.7            44.7          1.2          6.9
Ca2+         5.21            934            1 470           2 190         14 800       234
Sr2+         0.0695          7.95           16.9            32.2          253          4.67
Ba2+         (1-29)A         0.188          0.0907          0.188         0.024        0.188
Fe2+         (0-364)C        1.20           0.233           0.686         3.45         0.09
Mn2+         0.02            2.12           0.318           0.46          1.11         0.109
F–           3.03            0.9            0.204           0.967         (1-6)D       2.7
Cl–          21.5            5 150          5 190           8 800         36 800       1 480
Br–          (0-2)B          22             38.9            71            509          13.4
SO42–        8.56            510            195             221           1 210        104
Si(tot)      6.56            5.2            6.28            4.7           2.6          6.63
HCO3–        252             124            21.9            12            42           51.4
S2–          (0-01)B         0.05           0.0295          0.05          0.05         6.0´10–3
pH           8.58            7.1            7.55            7.45          6.8          7.83

A) No measurements available, data imported from borehole KSH01.
B) Based on detection limit.
C) Based on the Fe-tot measurement.
D) No measurements available, data imported from borehole KLX02.




Although the large number of data points gives the impression that there is a very good statistical
basis for parameterisation of site specific materials, it should also be remembered that the total
number of data points includes replicates as well as different contact times and particle size fractions
of the same crushed core samples.


3.2.4 Overview of literature data
Most literature data examined are based on crushed samples taken from single borehole sections
at a particular site. These generally take the form of replicate samples for a single particle size and
contact time (occasionally different spike concentrations of the element being studied). The range
of experimental conditions represented in these data sets is typically less than for the site specific
data sets described in Section 3.2.3 and the ranges of apparent variability are consequently narrower.
For obvious reasons, however, this doesn’t necessarily imply a lower level of uncertainty and it is
important to take into consideration the possibility that bounds of uncertainty may be underestimated
and thus incautious for the purposes of safety assessment calculations unless handled properly.
The literature references used for specific elements in this data compilation are summarised in
Table 3-6. Since some of the literature sources have been used in a supporting role (either in addition
to site-specific data, or purely for comparative purposes) how the data have actually been used is
also specified.




R-10-48                                                                                               53
Table 3-6. Summary of data sources for elements or redox states where site specific data are
unavailable. Literature sources are divided into three categories (A), (B), or (C) depending on
their usage in this compilation (see description of categories in table footnotes).

Element           Reference                                          Usage
(redox state)

Pb(II)            /Papelis 2001/                                     (A)
Np(IV)            /Huitti et al. 1996/                               (C)
Np(V)             /Huitti et al. 1996/                               (B)
Ni(II)            /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/                         (C)
Nb(V)             /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/                         (A)
Pd(II)            /Tachi et al. 1999/                                (A)
Pu(IV,V,VI)       /Huitti et al. 1996, Kulmala et al. 1998/          (A)
Pa(V)             /Huitti et al. 1996, Kulmala et al. 1996/          (A)
Ra(II)            /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995, Huitti et al. 1996/     (C)
Se(-II,IV,VI)     /Ticknor et al. 1996, Papelis 2001/                (A)
Tc(IV)            /Huitti et al. 1996/                               (C)
Sn(IV)            /Ticknor et al. 1996/                              (A)
U(VI)             /Huitti et al. 1996/                               (B)
U(IV)             /Huitti et al. 1996/                               (C)
Zr(IV)            /Huitti et al. 1996/                               (A)

Notes: (A) literature data used as a primary basis for Kd recommendation
        (B) used together with site investigation data to provide Kd recommendation
        (C) supporting data for comparative purposes only (not used in Kd recommendation)




In this data compilation, estimates of Kd uncertainty for the typically small literature data sets have
been augmented by a resampling approach. The underlying uncertainties associated with the individ-
ual data points are therefore included when estimating the overall uncertainty of the recommended
Kd range. This gives an expanded uncertainty range over that which would be otherwise obtained
by only considering the variance of the central estimates themselves as is customary in statistical
analysis. For data where the individual measurements have high statistical precision relative to the
variance of the set, this makes very little difference to the estimated uncertainty distribution. For data
where the precision of individual measurements is low, this is important feature of the overall data
uncertainty that cannot be neglected.
For the literature data sources, the uncertainty of the transfer factors used to extrapolate to site-specific
conditions (see Section 5.1.1) were also formally propagated in the estimation of the Kd data uncer-
tainty for individual data points. The overall uncertainty of the extrapolated data is then assumed to be a
convex combination of the underlying uncertainty distributions comprising the set. This is particularly
important for data sets comprised mainly of replicate measurements for a single rock sample, contact
time, particle size, and groundwater composition since the variance of the measurement data is not
likely to be truly representative of the actual data uncertainty.
Full propagation of measurement and transfer factor uncertainty was not performed for the site
investigation data since these data sets were typically much larger and represent a greater diversity
of experimental conditions (particle sizes, groundwater compositions, contact times, etc.) than that
typical of the literature data. Another reason is that the transfer factors for site specific materials
were considered more accurate than those calculated for literature data since the materials have been
characterised using largely identical methods. Consequently, the uncertainty of the extrapolation is
a smaller component of the overall data uncertainty and could be reasonably neglected for the site
investigation data. An argument could be still be made, however, for the propagation of transfer
factor uncertainties in the case of the site investigation data, although the recompense for doing this
was considered outweighed by the possibility of risk dilution in probabilistic calculations and thus
not merited. A detailed account of the handling of uncertainties for the data obtained from literature
sources can be found in Appendix C.




54                                                                                                  R-10-48
4         Conditions for which data are supplied


4.1       Physical state of the bedrock
Recommended Kd data are supplied for unaltered matrix rock typical of the Forsmark and Laxemar
site investigation areas. For Forsmark the reference rock type has been chosen as granite to grano-
diorite, metamorphic, medium-grained (SKB rock code 101057). For the Laxemar site, the Ävrö
granite rock type has been chosen (SKB rock code 501044). These are selected as the reference rock
types on account of the fact that they are dominant within the candidate rock volume at each site
and also because the overwhelming majority of the sorption data are for these particular rock types
making them an obvious choice for transport model parameterisation. Although it is theoretically
possible to calculate flow-path averaged data for rock volumes containing more than one rock type,
this was deemed inappropriate for the purposes of SR-Site since insufficient material property data
are available for the different rock types in order for this to be done in a dependable manner.
The data are numerically corrected to more accurately represent the properties of the intact rock
through the use of transfer factors which take into account total surface area and cation exchange
capacity (CEC) of the materials. The surface area of intact rock has been assessed by characterisation
of monolithic samples judged to be relatively undisturbed. It is assumed that the BET surface area of
the monolithic samples of the site specific rocks are sufficiently representative that they can be used
as a proxy for the rock matrix under in situ stress conditions.
Layers of hydrothermal alteration or weathering extending away from fracture surfaces into the rock
matrix are expected to be associated with enhanced retention properties relative to the unaltered
rock. This is due partly to the increased effective diffusivity near fracture surfaces on account of
greater intensity of microfracturing, and partly due to increased sorptivity. Increased sorptivity of
altered rock types is related to both the greater sorptive surface area associated with the altered
rock as well as the formation of secondary minerals (e.g. hematite microprecipitates) that may have
greater sorptivity than the original mineral phases. Since sorptivity of altered rocks does not always
scale proportionally with total surface area as quantified by the BET method it was not deemed
feasible to quantitatively account for the increased retention in the vicinity of fracture surfaces in a
defensible manner for SR-Site safety assessment calculations. At the same time, it is also noted that
this is one of the main conceptual uncertainties associated with the use of surface area correction
factors for the extrapolation of generic sorption data to site-specific materials.
Although different samples of nominally similar rock types typically exhibit sorptive properties that
appear to scale reasonably well with BET surface area, the different mineralogy of dissimilar rock types
introduces considerable uncertainty when handling generic data. In most cases examined in this compila-
tion, however, it appears that scaling generic sorption data with regard to BET surface area results in
correction factors that may be too large and thus tend to give cautiously low extrapolated Kd values.
Additional retardation of radionuclide transport in fracture coatings has not been quantified. This
is partly due to the difficulty in showing that data for a limited number of borehole intercepts with
flow-bearing fractures can be extrapolated to the entire migration path and also due to the problem of
estimating the additional retention in a defensible fashion based on limited statistical data for mineral
abundances in fracture coatings and their sorptive properties. The additional retention may include
sorption on clay minerals (e.g. chlorite, illite, smectite, etc.) and possible co-precipitation processes
involving fracture minerals such as calcite and barite.
The main purpose of this compilation is to supply data for the unaltered rock matrix which is deemed
to provide the bulk of the transport retardation at safety assessment timescales. Transport scenarios
incorporating processes not related to sorption on the unaltered rock matrix are beyond the scope of
this report and are the subject of other data reports (e.g. colloid transport) or are handled in the higher
level reports of SR-Site. The neglection of retardation processes in fracture coatings and alteration
layers adjacent to fracture surfaces is deemed cautious with regard to the transport scenarios to be
modelled in SR-Site. It is noted, however, that certain hydrochemical scenarios may arise where it
may be important to consider remobilisation of radionuclides associated with fracture filling minerals.
This possibility is dealt with specifically in the SR-Site Radionuclide transport report /SKB 2010d/.


R-10-48                                                                                                 55
4.2         Hydrogeochemistry under application conditions
4.2.1 Overview of a glacial cycle
Simulations documented in /Salas et al. 2010/ are used to establish hydrochemical profiles of major
groundwater constituents during the different time domains considered in SR-Site. In this compilation,
much of the focus has been on the temperate period extending from the contemporary groundwater
situation to that predicted to prevail at 9,000 y. As discussed previously in Section 2.4.3, the slow land
uplift continuing since the previous Weichselian glaciation in combination with infiltration of meteoric
water is expected to result in a gradual freshening of the groundwater hydrochemistry surrounding
the repository. At some point in the future it is expected that glacial conditions will be restored in
Scandinavia. Although many of the specific details are subject to uncertainty, it is possible to paint a
broad picture of the sequence of events as they are expected to unfold during the glacial cycle. To a
large extent this is informed by understanding of previous cycles of glaciation and interpretation of the
imprint they have left on both the geology and hydrochemistry of the Forsmark and Laxemar sites.
The glacial cycle is divided up into a number of periods referred to as temperate, peri-glacial, glacial, and
submerged. The term peri-glacial is used to describe the cold climate period prior to ice-front advance
where processes related to freezing of water may significantly affect the hydrogeology and hydrochemis-
try of the site. The submerged period refers to the time domain after ice-front retreat where the isostatic
load of the ice sheet has depressed the crust sufficiently that the site is inundated with marine water
and consequently below sea level. Figure 4-1 illustrates the reference glacial cycle of 120 ka duration
which is used as a basis for the geosphere transport assessment /SKB 2010d/. Although the evolution of
groundwater hydrogeology and hydrochemistry is a continuous process, it is useful to consider certain
representative timeframes during the glacial cycle to gain an appreciation of how groundwater hydroge-
ology and hydrochemistry are affected. The resulting snapshots of hydrogeological and hydrochemical
conditions then can be used to inform the discussion of likely impacts on radionuclide transport.
There are a number of different hydrogeological and hydrochemical changes that occur during the gla-
cial cycle that are important to consider. The first sequence of events during the temperate domain has
already been discussed. An example of the expected evolution of groundwater composition (salinity)
is shown in Figure 4-2. During the ice-front advance, the large hydraulic gradient near the advancing
front of the ice margin results in dilute glacial meltwater being forced to great depth in the rock before
exiting downstream of the advancing front although still short of the repository location. The meltwater
comes in part from water under the ice itself held in a liquid state by isostatic pressure and partly from
water draining from the surface of the ice through moulins near the ice margin (see Figure 4-3).



                                                 rged
                                              me                 Te
                                                                    m
                                            ub 6%
                                        S      1                 2     pe
                                                                 rat e
                                                                 6%                   Climate domains

                                                                                      Temperate
                                        i al                                          Periglacial
                                    Glac
                                      24%                                             Glacial
                                                                                        basal frozen
                                                                                        basal melting
                                                              lacial
                                                          rig                         Submerged
                                                        Pe 34%                        conditions




0      10      20      30      40         50        60           70         80   90   100      110      120
                                         Time (kyrs after present)

Figure 4‑1. Simplified illustration of a glacial cycle showing timing and duration of climate domains and
submerged conditions at Forsmark in the SR-Site reference glacial cycle (120 ka). The bar below the pie
chart shows the development of climate-related conditions for the reference glacial cycle as a time series of
climate domains and submerged periods. Figure taken from /SKB 2010a/.



56                                                                                                            R-10-48
 N
     1                                                     2
            0                                                      0

          -200                                                   -200

          -400                                                   -400

          -600                                                   -600

          -800                                                   -800
           (m)                                                    (m)




     3                                                     4
            0                                                      0

          -200                                                   -200

          -400                                                   -400

          -600                                                   -600

          -800                                                   -800
           (m)                                                    (m)




     5                                                     6
            0                                                      0

          -200                                                   -200

          -400                                                   -400

          -600                                                   -600

          -800                                                   -800
           (m)                                                    (m)




     7                                                     8
            0                                                      0

          -200                                                   -200

          -400                                                   -400

          -600                                                   -600


          -800                                                   -800
           (m)                                                    (m)




     9                                                      10
            0                                                      0

          -200                                                   -200

          -400                                                   -400

          -600                                                   -600


          -800                                                   -800
           (m)                                                    (m)




                                                                               0           3         6 (km)

Figure 4‑2. Illustration of the evolution of groundwater salinity (vertical slices showing total dissolved
solids, TDS mg/l) throughout a glacial cycle showing different snapshots of expected conditions at different
times. The figure shows salinity profiles during ice sheet advance (1 to 6), and ice sheet retreat (7 to 10).
When the ice sheet retreats the area is covered by a 100 m deep glacial meltwater lake. Figure taken from
/Salas et al. 2010/.




R-10-48                                                                                                       57
        Supra-glacial system                                Equilibrium line
        Cold snow zone         Percolation zone    Wet snow zone
                                                                               Moulin


         En-glacial system

         Sub-glacial system

         Groundwater
150 m
        150 km


Supra glacial system
                         X00 km                                                         X0 km




                                                                                                             Regional model width
                   Ice flow direction




In the ablation area, downstream of the equilibrium line, a system of catchment areas is assumed. Each catchment
area is assumed to be connected to the en- and sub-glacial systems through which surface melt water is assumed
to reach the bed.

Sub-glacial system
  Cold (frozen) bed                                    Warm (thawed) bed
                                         Basal melt water only       Basal and surface melt water




In the area of basal melting, where the water supply is from basal melting only, a slow system is assumed.
In the ablation area, downstream the equilibrium line, where both basal and surface melt water are assumed
to reach the bed, a fast system with channels or tunnels is assumed.

Figure 4‑3. Schematic illustration of an ice front showing meltwater in the subglacial system and drainage
of surface water through moulins near the ice front margin. Figure taken from /SKB 2010a/.


The disturbance in hydrogeological conditions displaces the existing saline water in the fracture
system forcing it downwards and forwards. This results in saline upconing of deep brine ground-
water to shallower depths in the repository vicinity. As the ice margin approaches and passes over
the repository, the flows are partly reversed and meltwater begins to penetrate the repository environ-
ment. Since the hydraulic connectivity of the fracture system and conductivity of the rock is very
heterogeneous, some recharge flowpaths experience very large and rapid changes in groundwater
chemistry, whereas others are hardly affected. Generally it is the flowpaths characterised by high
Darcy fluxes and low F-factors that experience the greatest changes.
After the ice margin has passed, the flow gradually decreases until at some point nearly stagnant
conditions are achieved owing to the extremely low hydraulic gradients under the main part of the
ice sheet and the influence of permafrost which reduces inflows to the groundwater system. The large
mass of ice on top of the land mass simultaneously pushes down on the crust which has an influence



58                                                                                                      R-10-48
on hydraulic conductivity of the rock. During this phase of the repository evolution which may last
up to about 10–20 ka /SKB 2010d/, flows are much reduced relative to the temperate phase and
flowpaths are longer to the discharge locations downstream of the ice front. Salt stored in the rock
matrix begins to diffuse back out into the diluted fracture water and slowly restores salinity in the
fracture system.
As the ice front begins to retreat, a similar sequence of processes is set in motion although in reverse. In
this case, the newly re-established saline groundwater in the fracture system may be rapidly flushed out
by the forced intrusion of meltwater in the vicinity of the ice front. After the retreating ice front passes
over the repository location, another episode of saline upconing might also occur. After the ice front has
retreated even further, the saline conditions typical of the temperate period becomes slowly re-established.
At this time, the isostatic load of the ice will result in the repository site being submerged below sea level.
The uplift of the crust due to glacial rebound will slowly change the shoreline location and
topographic elevation of the land relative to the sea. The slowly changing topographical conditions
and shoreline results in the repository eventually becoming an inland location. The slowly evolving
hydrogeological situation then results in a gradual freshening of groundwater in the repository
environment due to infiltrating meteoric water and a return to temperate conditions. Such glacial
cycles can be expected to reoccur with a predetermined periodicity and changing intensity with time
as described in the SR-Site Climate report /SKB 2010a/. During the full glacial cycle, there may also
be transients (i.e. stadial and interstadial periods) as well as shorter glacial and interglacial periods.


4.2.2 Issues of importance for assignment of conditional Kd values
Although the description of a glacial cycle given in Section 4.2.1 gives a broad overview of the main
events characterising the evolution of the groundwater system, this does not by itself fully inform the
discussion of the particular impacts on radionuclide retention and migration processes. The main fea-
ture of importance for assignment of reliable conditional Kd values is, of course, the hydrochemical
profile of groundwater in the repository environment. In spite of this, it is also important to consider
flow rates and the F-factor during the different phases of repository evolution. This is important
since it is not only the groundwater composition that determines transport of radionuclides, but also
the flow rate, F-factor, and the duration of different hydrogeological-hydrochemical phases during
which migration of radionuclides may occur.
It is also highly relevant to not only consider average changes in groundwater chemistry throughout
the repository volume as a whole, but also how these are resolved in space and time. Owing to the
heterogeneous nature of the fracture network, certain recharge flowpaths that transect the repository
are associated with greater flowrates and lower F-factors than other flowpaths. In the context of
groundwater chemistry evolution, it is not only the F-factor characterising the discharge flowpath
between a canister position and the surface that is of significance, but also the recharge flowpath lead-
ing from the surface to the particular canister position. In certain respects, the F-factor of the recharge
flowpath can be more important since it has a direct bearing on the rate of change of groundwater
chemistry at the radionuclide source location. This has a strong influence on the magnitude of the
conditional Kd value that is appropriate for describing radionuclide transport downstream along a
migration path from the canister position.
Generally, the fast flowpaths featuring elevated flow and relatively low F-factors can be expected to
exhibit greater fluctuations in chemical composition. When the regional hydraulic gradient increases
in response to ice front advance or retreat, these flowpaths undergo larger relative changes with regard
to flow and F-factor than flowpaths that experience more subdued changes. Some flowpaths may
become more active during glacial advance and retreat owing to the changing hydraulic boundary
conditions, effects of isostatic loading, and permafrost while others may become less active. Flow
trajectories may also change slowly or quickly on the timescale of solute transport, which might leave
more slowly migrating radionuclides effectively trapped in low flow regions while transporting other
nuclides along freshly activated, although previously less active flowpaths. It is difficult to predict a
priori how changes in groundwater chemistry will propagate along a flowpath relative to the transport
of the nuclides, although one would expect the groundwater composition to approximately follow the
same trends observed at the canister release locations although time-shifted forward by virtue of being
downstream of the release location.



R-10-48                                                                                                     59
It is expected that solute plumes of sorbing nuclides will migrate more slowly than the groundwater
mixing fronts which, to a large extent, are dominated by the transport of effectively non-sorbing
components. Even if many of the major groundwater constituents do participate in ion-exchange
reactions, their high concentrations and low sorptivity means that they can be considered effectively
non-sorbing for the purposes of the safety assessment calculations. The situation is additionally com-
plicated by chemical reactions involving minerals (e.g. calcite, ferric oxyhydroxides, and amorphous
ferrous monosulphide) which buffer groundwater pH, carbonate concentration, and redox potentials.
These chemical processes are considered in the hydrogeochemical calculations made by /Salas et al.
2010/ although they are not correlated to individual migration paths in the subsequent modelling
described in the SR-Site Radionuclide transport report /SKB 2010d/.
The relatively rapid progression of mixing fronts along certain flowpaths means that many of the migrat-
ing nuclides may experience multiple cycles of groundwater mixing fronts catching up and overtaking
them. In some cases this might be expected to give rise to strongly non-linear effects in their migration
properties. Since it is not currently feasible to simulate geosphere transport involving non-linear sorption
processes in a straight-forward manner in SR-Site, pessimistic scenarios for groundwater composition
are chosen in order to cautiously overestimate radiological risks. Implicit in this treatment of sorption is
the acknowledgement that predicted residence time distributions of radionuclides are largely fictive since
they may not accurately represent the migration process as it actually occurs.
It is not currently possible to quantitatively relate changes in sorptivity with evolving groundwater
chemistry for many of the safety relevant nuclides. This is primarily due to a lack of detailed, multi-
dimensional data sets of unambiguous sorption data for relevant geological materials. An exception
is made in the case of redox sensitive solutes where the aqueous phase chemistry is sufficiently
well-understood to predict which redox state should be predominant. Generally, the redox sensitive
solutes are expected to exhibit reduced mobility under strongly reducing conditions and increased
mobility under mildly reducing or oxidising conditions. For a small number of elements that sorb
by means of ion-exchange, it is possible to make approximate estimates of the impact of changing
groundwater chemistry using a thermodynamic modelling approach. This principally involves
assessing the impact of changing ionic strength on ion-exchange sorptivity. How these changes in
sorptivity are quantified is discussed in more detail in Section 5.1.1.
In cases where it is not possible to quantitatively estimate the impact of changing groundwater
composition, it is necessary to combine sorption data representing a wide range of contact water
compositions. In this manner, uncertainty arising due to the diversity of hydrochemical conditions
during the different time domains is approximately accounted for. In cases where it is possible to
make quantitative predictions of altered sorptivity, it is important to consider the entire glacial cycle
to ascertain which groundwater conditions should be deemed most representative for safety assess-
ment calculations involving radionuclide transport. Although very brief periods of high salinity and
flowrate are expected during ice margin advance and retreat (see Figure 4-2), these are thought to
be sufficiently short-lived that they can be neglected. This must also be considered in the context of
landscape dose factors (LDF’s) for the particular time domain under consideration which may alter
its relative importance for radiological risk.
The challenge is then to identify the most unfavourable (although still representative) conditions
expected for nuclide transport and assume this as a pessimistic scenario for assignment of condition-
ally constant Kd values. Since the statistics of groundwater composition are not representative of
individual migration paths, this represents a large epistemic uncertainty which gives rise to large
ranges of uncertainty for the recommended Kd values. The handling of this uncertainty is discussed
in more detail in Chapter 5.




60                                                                                                  R-10-48
5         Quantification of data and uncertainties

Since sorption partitioning data are obtained by laboratory experiments involving crushed and
sieved rock samples in contact with synthetic groundwater, corrections typically need to be made to
extrapolate the data to site-specific, in situ conditions. This may include; corrections for the state of
disaggregation of the laboratory samples relative to the in situ rock, corrections for differences in
mineralogy, and corrections for deviations in the in situ groundwater composition. Section 5.1 gives
a detailed overview of the approach used to transfer data derived from laboratory investigations to
in situ conditions. Section 5.2 contains a brief summary of element specific features and processes
and presents the recommended data.



5.1       Procedures for extrapolation of data and quantification
          of uncertainty
Owing to large uncertainties concerning the interpretation of time dependencies in the laboratory
data, no attempt has been made to model or filter the data with regard to sorption contact time.
The slow diffusive redistribution of solute from the contacting solution and external surfaces to
the internal surfaces of crushed rock particles implies a sorptivity that increases slowly with time.
Since the modelling of diffusive disequilibrium tends to give inflated and uncertain upper limits for
the Kd value, the neglection of this process is thought to be a relatively cautious assumption. Other
uncertainties relating to chemical weathering or compositional drift during the course of experiments
is captured by not excluding data for the largest particle sizes and shortest contact times to give a
cautiously bounded lower limit to the Kd uncertainty distribution. This discussion concerns mostly
the site specific data sets where detailed data for different particle size fractions and contact times
are available. For literature data, however, the sampled experimental parameter space is frequently
sparser (e.g. data typically consists of a single size fraction and contact time) and potentially associ-
ated with greater levels of uncertainty.
The corrections applied to the data take the form of; 1) a mechanical damage transfer factor to
account for the differences in sorptive surface area between crushed and in situ rock, and; 2) a CEC
(cation exchange capacity) transfer factor to account for mineralogical differences between the rock
used in experiments and the site specific rock. The mechanical damage transfer factor is based on the
ratio of measured BET surface areas of the intact rock relative to the crushed samples used in experi-
ments. The CEC transfer factor is based on CEC measurements wherever possible, although in some
cases Fe-content or estimated biotite mineral fractions have been used as proxy indictors of CEC. In
cases where multiple size fractions have been used in laboratory investigations, an additional surface
area normalising transfer factor is used to provide a common reference basis for calculations.
As outlined previously, the objective of this report is generally not to provide a description of
sorptive chemistry that captures radionuclide retention processes exactly as they would occur in the
geosphere. Instead the primary function of the work undertaken is to make recommendations of Kd
values that are cautiously chosen with regard to the particular transport scenarios modelled to avoid
underestimation of radiological risks in the SR-Site safety assessment.




R-10-48                                                                                                61
5.1.1 Overview of transfer factor approach for sorption property correction
In this Kd data compilation, a number of transfer factors (using the terminology of /Bradbury and
Baeyens 1998/) are used to account for various biases in the underlying measurement data derived from
laboratory experiments. The approach is broadly similar to that discussed previously in /Crawford et al.
2006/ although with some minor modifications. The transfer factors employed in this work are:
 fA            A surface area normalisation transfer factor which accounts for the difference in
               sorptive surface area amongst different size fractions used in laboratory investiga-
               tions. It is defined as the ratio of the sorptive surface area of a reference size fraction
               of crushed rock relative to the actual size fraction used in the experiment. This allows
               data obtained for different size fractions to be converted into a mutually compatible
               form that can then be pooled before extrapolation to in situ conditions.
 fm            A mechanical damage transfer factor which accounts for differences between the sorptive
               surface area of the reference size fraction of crushed rock and undisturbed rock in situ.
 fcec          A transfer factor which accounts for differences between the cation exchange capac-
               ity (CEC) of the site specific rock type and that used in laboratory experiments.
 fchem         A transfer factor which accounts for differences between the groundwater chemistry
               under application conditions in situ and that used in laboratory investigations.

Since the first three transfer factors fA, fm, and fcec are defined as ratios of variables that have either
normal or log-normally distributed uncertainty ranges, the transfer factors themselves also have
log-normally distributed uncertainty ranges. Since the apparent Rd values are also defined as ratios
of activity (or concentration), they too are expected to be associated with log-normally distributed
uncertainties. The first three transfer factors are multiplicative (additive in logarithmic space) and are
applied in the following fashion:
Rd0 = Rd · ƒA									(5-1)
Kd0 = Rd0 · ƒm · ƒcec 								(5-2)
Although the chemistry transfer factor is defined as a ratio, there is no particular reason for this to
be log-normally distributed since it contains elements of both uncertainty and spatial variability
(typically non-random). In the cases where fchem can be estimated, the uncertainty range for the
conditional Kd value corresponding to a particular groundwater hydrochemical profile is obtained by
convolution of the individual probability density functions describing Kd0 and fchem.
Kd = Kd0 ⊗ ƒchem 								(5-3)
The different forms of the Rd and Kd partitioning coefficients used in Equations 5-1 to 5-3 have the
following specific meanings:
 Rd      is the apparent sorption partitioning coefficient (i.e. raw data estimate) derived from
         laboratory measurements for a particular crushed particle size fraction.
 Rd0     is a surface area normalised sorption partitioning coefficient for a specific crushed rock
         reference size fraction.
 Kd0     is the recommended, site-specific sorption partitioning coefficient for sorption on intact
         rock in situ. It is applicable for the actual groundwater composition used in the laboratory
         investigation.
 Kd      is the recommended, site-specific sorption partitioning coefficient for sorption on intact
         rock in situ. The Kd value is corrected for application groundwater compositions differing
         from the reference groundwater composition used in the laboratory investigation.

Although individual Kd0 values calculated using Equation 5-2 are formally associated with log-
normally distributed uncertainties, the ensemble distribution of pooled Kd0 values is not always log-
normally distributed. This depends entirely on the heterogeneity of the underlying data sets that are
pooled together and their applicability for the site specific conditions. In most cases, however, the
pooled distributions of Kd0 values are sufficiently well-behaved that a simple log-normal uncertainty
distribution can be assumed in describing the aggregate data set.


62                                                                                                 R-10-48
Implicit in the use of these transfer factors is the assumption that diffusive disequilibrium can be
neglected when using sorption data derived from laboratory investigations. Generally the neglection
of diffusion gives pessimistic predictions of Kd values since sorptivity should always be underesti-
mated. There is a noteworthy time dependency with a trend towards larger Rd values at increasing
contact times in the sorption data reported in the site investigations. The origin of this time
dependency is unclear as it does not always appear to be fully compatible with simple models of
diffusive uptake. Slow weathering processes, for example, can also contribute to the slow change in
sorptivity over time. It may also be the case that there are other processes which introduce additional
biases related to contact solution composition that cannot be properly accounted for at this time (e.g.
changes in headspace pCO2, chemical kinetics, etc.).
The pragmatic approach has therefore been to treat data from all particle size fractions and contact
times with equal dignity thereby consolidating these additional epistemic uncertainties together as
part of an overall envelope of data uncertainty. In most cases the between-sample variability appears
to be sufficiently large that the overall temporal trend is weak when considering the aggregate data
set and differences in sorptive surface area appears to be the dominant factor.


Calculation of the surface area normalisation transfer factor, fA
In the laboratory investigations connected with the site descriptive modelling for Forsmark /Byegård
et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/, sorption measurements were performed on a number
of different size fractions of crushed rock obtained from bore core samples. BET surface area
measurements were also performed on crushed rock although using size fractions that sometimes
differed from those used in sorption experiments as indicated in Table 5-1.
Precise particle size measurements were not made on the sieve size fractions used in the laboratory
investigations. Instead, the mean particle size is estimated using the model described by /André et al.
2008a/ where a uniform distribution of particle sizes spanning the upper (d2) and lower (d1) sieve
size is assumed:
     3 d4 −d4 
d m =  23 13  								(5-4)
     4  d 2 − d1 
Sorption, being a surface mediated process, is strongly coupled to the surface area of different
minerals present in a geological matrix. The quantification of how sorptivity varies with surface area
is therefore a particularly important aspect of data transfer from laboratory measurements to safety
assessment conditions. If sorption data derived from a number of particle sizes or different sources
are to be used to recommend Kd ranges for safety assessment, it is first necessary to transform the
data into a form that allows the data to be pooled in a consistent fashion. Since the BET surface area
measurements documented in the site investigations were not always available for the same particle
sizes as those used in sorption measurements, there is also a necessity to extrapolate the sorption
data to some reference particle size where surface area measurements are available.

Table 5-1. Summary of measurements performed on crushed rock size fractions in the Forsmark
/Byegård et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/ site investigations. The (mean) particle size
is estimated using Equation 5-4.

Sieve size (mm)   Particle size (mm) Sorption meas.   BET meas.

0.063–0.125       0.101             Yes               Yes
0.25–0.5          0.402             Yes               No
1.0–2.0           1.607             Yes               No
2.0–4.0           3.214             No                Yes




R-10-48                                                                                              63
The specific surface area of crushed rock is equal to a contribution from external particle surfaces
and the surface area of the internal porosity of the particles. The contribution from the internal poros-
ity is customarily assumed to be statistically invariant over different size fractions as is the average
surface roughness and sphericity of irregular particles comprising the crushed rock samples. Under
these assumptions, the specific surface area of different particle size fractions can be given using the
equation:
                                6λ
As ( m 2 g ) = Aext + Aint =          + Aint 						(5-5)
                               ρb d m
If specific surface area measurements of different particle size fractions are available, the surface rough-
ness/sphericity parameter, λ and specific internal surface area, Aint can be obtained from the slope and
intercept of the linear regression line best describing the measurement data plotted against the inverse of
average particle size, 1/dm. The site specific BET measurement data described in /Byegård et al. 2008/
and /Selnert et al. 2009/ were performed on duplicate samples of the 0.063–0.125 mm and 2–4 mm size
fraction. Owing to the low number of replicates and the use of only two size fractions, this results in a
considerable uncertainty in both the slope and intercept of the regression line for the data, particularly if
the underlying assumptions of the simplified regression model are not properly fulfilled.
The approach adopted in this compilation is to firstly introduce a transfer factor, fA that allows the
sorption data obtained for different crushed rock size fractions to be scaled to a convenient reference
particle size. Since the largest particle size fraction is theoretically most similar to undisturbed in situ
rock, the 2–4 mm particle size was chosen as the appropriate reference size for this calculation.
Assuming that the sorptivity of different crushed rock fractions of the same rock type scales linearly
with BET surface area, Equation 5-5 can be used to define the surface area transfer factor, fA as:
      6λ                 6λ         
fA =        + Aint           + Aint  						(5-6)
     ρ d                  ρ d
      b ref              b m        
Where dref is the reference particle size and dm is the average particle size according to the particle
size distribution model (e.g. Equation 5-4). In order to circumvent problems relating to extrapolation
from small sample numbers and provide cautious transfer factors for surface area effects related to
particle size, there are two important limiting cases to consider:
1. External surface area of crushed particles is the dominant contributor to total sorptive surface
   area (fA ≈ dm / dref ).
2. Internal surface area of crushed particles is the dominant contributor to total sorptive surface area
   (fA ≈ 1).
In the first case, it is not necessary to know the surface area of the internal porosity since the external
surface area of the crushed rock particles is assumed to be dominant. Furthermore, if the surface rough-
ness/sphericity can be assumed to be approximately constant over different size fractions, it is not neces-
sary to know its value exactly since it occurs in both the numerator and denominator of Equation 5-6
and mutually cancels. In the second case, if the internal surface area is very large then there should be no
measurable difference between the properties of small and large particles since the specific surface area
is approximately the same in both cases (implying no surface area correction is necessary). According
to the simplified model of surface area partitioning, the correction factor fA therefore is constrained to
always lie between the ratio of characteristic particle sizes (dm/dref) and unity.
In reality, particles always have a geometric external surface area that must be equal to or greater than
that of a sphere of equivalent volume (since a sphere is the minimal surface that can enclose a volume
in three-dimensional space). In many studies documented in the literature (e.g. /White and Brantley
2003/), the external surface area of particles can be shown to be significantly greater than that of a sphere
of equivalent volume, hence the use of a surface roughness/sphericity factor to modify the size of the
external surface area. In /André et al. 2009/, for example, λ is found to vary between about 6–13 based
upon linear regression of data using Equation 5-5. The value of λ is highly variable and depends on how
the rock is crushed and can vary significantly between different samples and rock types depending on
their material properties. The impact of the different assumptions contained in the limiting cases (1) and
(2) outlined above is illustrated in Figure 5-1 where raw site investigation data (Rd) for Am sorption
using saline groundwater is extrapolated to the reference size fraction (3.214 mm) using Equation 5-1.



64                                                                                                   R-10-48
                1
                          Dominant external surface (limiting case 1)

               0.9        mixed contribution (lambda = 15)

                          mixed contribution (lambda = 6)
               0.8        mixed contribution (lambda = 1)
                                                                                          Aint = 0 m2/g
                          Dominant internal surface (limiting case 2)                     λ ≥ 1.0
               0.7




CDF (% rank)
                                                                                   Aint = 0.02 m2/g
               0.6
                                                                                   λ = 15.0

               0.5
                                                                                   Aint = 0.02 m2/g
                                                                                   λ = 6.0
               0.4
                                                                               Aint = 0.02 m2/g
                                                                               λ = 1.0
               0.3


               0.2
                                                                                raw data (no correcon)
                                                                                ( fA = 1.0)
               0.1


                0
                 0.001                 0.01                         0.1        1                          10

                                                                Rd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure 5‑1. Surface-area corrected, Rd0 (m3/kg) values assuming different cases of surface area distribution
 according to Equation 5.6. Cases labelled (1) and (2) are limiting and all other variants are constrained to
 lie between these cases. Data are for an ensemble data set of Am(III) sorption measurements on different
 particle size fractions of crushed rock in contact with saline water /Byegård et al. 2008/ and are presented
 as a cumulative distribution function (CDF).


 For the purposes of safety assessment, the most defensible choice is to assume that the external
 particle surfaces dominate the measured BET surface area of crushed rock samples as this will
 tend to overpredict the correction required and give smaller Rd0 values as can be readily appreciated
 from Figure 5-1. As can be seen from Table 5-2, the smallest size fractions are associated with the
 largest corrections. For the 0.063–0.125 mm fraction, for example, the correction implies a reduction
 of the measured Rd value by factor of 32, whereas for the largest size fraction used in sorption
 measurements (1–2 mm) the correction implies a reduction by only a factor of 2. Since the smallest
 size fractions also can be safely assumed to have the greatest surface area contribution from freshly
 created external surfaces, the assumption appears to be cautious.
 It should be noted that in this report, the use of the surface area transfer factor fA is limited to the
 site investigation data from Forsmark and Laxemar where data is available for different crushed
 size fractions. The use of the fA transfer factor allows the data set to be pooled in a straight-forward
 fashion before extrapolation to in situ conditions. For literature data where only a single size fraction
 is used, fA has not been calculated since the actual size fraction used in experiments can be adopted
 directly as the reference size.

 Table 5-2. Surface area normalisation transfer factors, fA for different size fractions of crushed
 rock used in Forsmark and Laxemar site investigatons.

 Sieve size (mm)         Particle size (mm) fA                          1/fA

 0.063–0.125             0.101                 0.0313                   32
 0.25–0.5                0.402                 0.125                    8
 1.0–2.0                 1.607                 0.5                      2
 2.0–4.0                 3.214                 1                        1




 R-10-48                                                                                                       65
Calculation of the mechanical damage transfer factor, fm
This transfer factor accounts for differences in sorptive surface area between the reference size
fraction of crushed rock used in laboratory investigations and that of undisturbed rock in situ.
Although linear regression of BET surface area data can be used to estimate the internal surface area
of crushed rock particles, mechanical damage arising from the crushing process induces additional
microfracturing which supplements the pre-existing surface area of the internal porosity. The bias
introduced by using the estimated internal surface area of the rock as a proxy for the sorptive surface
area under in situ conditions can then result in the recommendation of non-cautious Kd data ranges
for safety assessment.
To avoid this, it is necessary to measure the sorptive surface area of the rock under as close to in situ
conditions as possible. Generally this is not possible to fully achieve owing to stress release and
drilling induced mechanical damage incurred when extracting bore core samples. If the rock samples
are of a sufficiently large and monolithic form, however, the error introduced is likely to be small.
The BET surface areas of intact rock core samples from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation
areas have been measured by /André et al. 2009/. The internal surface area of the
400–500 g monoliths was found to be 0.018±0.005 m2/g (3 replicates) for the Forsmark rock and
0.025±0.028 m2/g (6 replicates) for the Laxemar rock. The larger standard error of the Laxemar
measurements is thought to be due to the greater number of samples used. Since the BET surface
area measurements of the crushed rock samples used in the site investigations were also based on
small numbers of replicates, 2σ errors were propagated in the Gaussian error analysis as is standard
laboratory practice for such small sample sizes. Once again assuming that the sorptivity of different
crushed rock fractions scales in an approximately linear fashion with BET surface area, the mechani-
cal damage transfer factor, fm is defined as:
       A
 f m = 0 									(5-7)
       Aref
Where A0 (m2/g) is the measured BET surface area of the core sample and Aref (m2/g) is the
corresponding surface area of the reference size fraction of the crushed rock used in the sorption
characterisation. In this report it is assumed that the uncertainty distribution for both the numerator
and denominator of Equation 5-7 is lognormally distributed. This gives slightly more pessimistic
mechanical transfer factors than if normal uncertainties were to be assumed. This choice is consid-
ered to be motivated in the current data compilation for reasons of caution given the very low sample
numbers upon which the calculations are based. It can also be motivated on account of the fact that
the frequently high relative errors associated with the measurement data would otherwise suggest
the existence of physically non-meaningful, negative surface areas. The choice of a lognormal form
for the uncertainty distribution is therefore a logical choice to avoid such situations. In either case,
the ratio of normally-distributed or lognormally-distributed variables gives a lognormally distributed
transfer factor as a result. Using the Forsmark core sample results allows data for both investigation
sites (and literature data) to be scaled to Forsmark site specific conditions. The results for Forsmark
are given in Table 5-3.


Calculation of the cation exchange capacity (CEC) transfer factor, fcec
In the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations, cation exchange capacities of crushed rock samples
were measured for site specific rock types. These data are also reported in /Byegård et al. 2008/ and
/Selnert et al. 2009/. The gravimetric measurement technique was based on the ISO 13536 standard
which uses a 1 M BaCl2 solution to displace ion-exchanged cations followed by a step in which the
exchanged Ba2+ ions are in turn displaced by Mg2+ (0.02 m MgSO4 solution) and then precipitated as
insoluble BaSO4 (barite). The CEC data for rocks sampled from both investigation areas are given in
Table 5-4.
As can be seen from Table 5-4, the CEC measurements for site specific rock materials are subject
to large uncertainties. Generally, only a small part of the Mg2+ is absorbed in the Ba2+ displacement
step which renders it difficult to verify a concentration decrease from a blank solution. This is
compounded by the relatively large uncertainty in Mg2+ concentrations (~5%) which means that in
most cases statistically verifiable CEC estimates cannot be made.




66                                                                                               R-10-48
Table 5-3. Mechanical damage transfer factor, fm scaled to Forsmark specific conditions. The
fm values are calculated using Equation 5-7 assuming an available matrix porosity surface area
of 0.018±0.005 m2/g. The error estimates for fm are derived for 2σ errors using Gaussian error
propagation. It is noted that the large error estimates for fm (in some cases are equal to or larger
than the central estimate) are simply a measure of the statistical dispersion of the transfer factor
uncertainty distribution on an arithmetic scale and should not be taken to imply the existence of
negative arithmetic transfer factors.

Borehole     Sample depth    Aref                fm             log10 fm

KFM01A       103 m           0.024±0.022         0.74±1.39      0.14±0.56
KFM01A       487 m           0.047±0.004         0.38±0.56      –0.46±0.22
KFM01A       908 m           0.030±0.001         0.60±0.31      –0.27±0.21
KFM02A       552 m           0.041±0.010         0.44±0.32      –0.35±0.30
KFM03A       536 m           0.013±0.003         1.38±0.91      0.13±0.27
KFM06A       440 m           0.035±0.005         0.52±0.30      –0.32±0.24
KFM07A       387 m           0.032±0.008         0.56±0.41      –0.25±0.30
KLX02        217 m           0.061±0.006         0.29±0.16      –0.57±0.23
KLX02        753 m           0.042±0.010         0.43±0.29      –0.38±0.28
KLX02A       509 m           0.029±0.006         0.62±0.40      –0.23±0.27
KLX02A       682 m           0.037±0.007         0.48±0.31      –0.34±0.26
KLX02A       936 m           0.096±0.004         0.19±0.10      –0.77±0.21
KLX03A       522 m           0.035±0.0004        0.51±0.26      –0.34±0.21
KLX04A       489 m           0.042±0.002         0.43±0.22      –0.41±0.21
KLX04A       718 m           0.029±0.021         0.61±0.93      –0.02±0.50
KLX05        482 m           0.094±0.007         0.19±0.10      –0.76±0.22
KSH01A       981 m           0.051±0.009         0.35±0.22      –0.48±0.25



Table 5-4. Cation exchange capacities (cmol/kg) measured for Forsmark and Laxemar rock types.
The measurements are for single samples (no replicates) with 1σ error estimates based on 5%
uncertainty in Mg2+ quantification. In cases where no statistically verifiable CEC could be measured
a value specified as less than the detection limit is given.

Borehole     Sample depth   Rock type      Size fraction (mm)   CEC (cmol/kg)

KFM01A       103 m          101057         0.063–0.125          0.9±0.7
                                           1–2                  <1
KFM01A       487 m          101057         0.063–0.125          0.7±0.6
                                           1–2                  < 1.2
KFM01A       908 m          101057         0.063–0.125          < 0.6
                                           1–2                  < 0.9
KFM02A       552 m          101051         0.063–0.125          2.6±2.0
                                           1–2                  < 1.2
KLX02        217 m          501056         0.063–0.125          < 2.5
                                           1–2                  < 1.0
KLX03A       522 m          501046         0.063–0.125          2.1±1.4
                                           1–2                  0.9±0.7
KLX02A       682 m          501031         0.063–0.125          2.3±1.4
                                           1–2                  1.0±0.6
KLX04A       489 m          501036         0.063–0.125          2.2±0.9
                                           1–2                  1.0±0.7
KLX05        482 m          501036         0.063–0.125          2.3±1.8



This presents a problem for comparison between site specific rock types and literature data since
it is not possible to calculate robust CEC transfer factors scaled to the site specific materials. In
granitic rocks the CEC is generally dominated by the so-called dark minerals consisting of biotite,
hornblende, and to a lesser extent chlorite. The Fe content of the rock is also very closely related to
the biotite and hornblende concentrations. If the biotite contents of the rock materials reported in
the literature data are known then approximate transfer factors can be estimated on the basis of the
relative biotite content compared to the site specific rock types.


R-10-48                                                                                               67
  Laxemar rock types generally have a higher biotite content than Forsmark rocks and so can be expected
  to have a proportionately larger CEC. Fortunately, for the purposes of scaling sorption data for Laxemar
  rock to Forsmark site specific conditions, there are a large number of measurements of Fe content
  of rock from the two sites. These data take the form of whole rock geochemical analyses and are
  documented in the site investigation reports although are summarised in /Sidborn et al. 2010/. Assuming
  that the CEC of the rock samples is dominated by the biotite content of the rocks and that the measured
  Fe content is proportional to the biotite concentration, the CEC transfer factor can be estimated as:
                        CEC0    [ Biotite %]0 Fe0 						(5-8)
     f cec =                  ≈                ≈
                        CECref [ Biotite % ]ref Fe ref

  In a similar fashion to previous transfer factor definitions, the subscript zero specifies the CEC,
  biotite, or Fe content of the site specific rock and the subscript labelled ref is the corresponding
  measure for the crushed rock used in sorption experiments. Since the site specific rock types from
  the Forsmark and Laxemar areas have been studied using identical methods, the relative variation of
  Fe content between the sites is deemed a good proxy for calculation of a CEC transfer factor using
  Equation 5-8. Since the Fe content is reported as percentage Fe2O3 by mass, it is necessary to use
  a Beta distribution to model the data since the percentage by definition cannot be less than 0% or
  exceed 100%. From the specified mean and standard deviation of Fe2O3 content given in /Sidborn
  et al. 2010/, the parameters of the Beta distribution can be estimated and stochastic simulations made
  to calculate fcec using a Monte-Carlo method. The uncertainty distribution for the fcec transfer factor
  calculated in this fashion is shown in Figure 5-2 along with a lognormal fit to the data histogram.
  For radionuclides where only literature data sources were available, the measured CEC of the rock
  was used assuming a very approximate CEC value of 1.0±0.5 cmol/kg for the Forsmark site-specific
  rock. In cases where no CEC data were available, a subjective assessment based on reported biotite
  content was used instead. The average biotite content of the reference metagranite (SKB rock code
  101057) rock type in Forsmark is roughly 5.4% /Sandström and Stephens 2009/. In most cases, if the
  biotite content of the rock used in the literature sources was approximately the same (i.e. differing by
  not more than about 50%) then the CEC transfer factor was neglected.


                      2.5

                                                                              Lognormal fit
                                                                              Simulated data

                       2



                                                    fcec ≈ 0.63±0.2




Probability Density
                      1.5




                       1




                      0.5




                       0
                            0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8      1          1.2   1.4         1.6        1.8

                                                     fcec

  Figure 5‑2. Uncertainty distribution for the cation exchange capacity transfer factor, fcec for the conversion
  of Laxemar Rd data (Ävrö granite, rock type 501044) to values appropriate for Forsmark rock (Forsmark
  metagranite, SKB rock code 101057) assuming CEC in approximate proportionality to measured Fe2O3 content.
  Although the Fe2O3 content of the rock (wt%) is modelled as a Beta distribution on the interval [0,1], the result-
  ing uncertainty distribution for the ratio is well described by a lognormal distribution as indicated in the figure.


  68                                                                                                          R-10-48
Generally, the CEC is thought to have the largest impact on solutes that sorb by way of an ion-exchange
mechanism and therefore the CEC transfer factor is only needed for a select few radionuclides. The
radionuclides of Sr, Cs, and Ra are included in this group, although the apparent sensitivity of Ni
sorption to ionic strength also suggests that a CEC correction is preferable even though its sorption
mechanism may not necessarily be a strictly ion-exchange based process.
Although this is approximately consistent with the presumed sorption mechanism of these solutes,
there are other radionuclides whose sorption is closely associated with the biotite content of the rock
for various reasons. In particular, this affects the redox sensitive solutes U, Np, and Tc which are
known to sorb strongly to biotite. In /Kienzler et al. 2009/, for example, the sorption of U, Np, and
Tc was found to be strongly correlated with Fe content (being a proxy for biotite) as determined by
combining data from α-autoradiography and SEM-EDX1 studies for rock samples taken from the
Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory (Äspö-HRL). Interestingly, no association was found between the Fe
content and the sorption of Am and Pu which were sorbed heterogeneously on all exposed surfaces.
It is noted, however, that the literature data are not unequivocal concerning the preferential sorption
of Am and Pu and there are other investigations where Am and Pu have been found to sorb more
strongly in association with biotite (e.g. /Anderson et al. 2007/). Interestingly, Pu sorption has been
found to be strongly associated with the presence of Mn oxides on zeolitic tuff samples taken from
Yucca mountain, although not in association with Fe oxides /Duff et al. 2001/.
Originally it was thought that the sorption of, for example, uranyl ion (UO22+) was a cation exchange
phenomenon rather than being related to reduction of U(VI) to the less mobile U(IV) form. This was
predicated on the basis that U(VI) was observed to sorb strongly on biotite, although not on pyrite
(e.g. /Beall et al. 1980/). More recently it has been suggested that the strong association of certain
redox sensitive radionuclides with biotite might be related to reduction of oxidised forms by Fe(II),
following surface complexation on frayed edges sites (FES) of micaceous minerals or on ferric oxy-
hydroxide microprecipitates (e.g. /Cui and Eriksen 1996, Ilton et al. 2004, Lee et al. 2009a, b/). This
process has also been shown to occur on non-biotite surfaces /Regenspurg et al. 2009/. There are also
studies, e.g. /Singer et al. 2009/, that suggest the formation of UO2 microprecipitates in association
with mica minerals thereby blurring the distinction between sorption and surface precipitation.
The situation is further complicated by the possibility that microbial activity can strongly influence
these reactions (e.g. /Liu et al. 2009/). Although highly relevant for the mobility of redox sensitive
radionuclides in surface environments and close to fracture surfaces in situ, the impact of microbi-
ally mediated reactions deep within the rock matrix is questionable on account of the large physical
dimensions of microbes relative to that of the microporosity in the rock.
Correlation of sorptive properties with Fe or biotite content has also been reported for Se by /Jan
et al. 2007, 2008/. Although Se is redox sensitive it is also interesting in that it theoretically should
be speciated in a predominantly anionic form (i.e. aqueous phase speciation) in most situations.
Under strongly reducing conditions the HSe– specie is predominant, whereas under weakly reducing
to oxidising conditions it exists primarily in an oxyanion form (SeO32– or SeO42–). In /Vandergraaf
et al. 1982/ it is theorised that the association of Se with Fe containing pyroxenes (hornblende) is
related to reaction with ferric oxyhydroxides to form ferroselenite precipitates. Other authors /Tachi
et al. 1998/ suggest that the association of oxyanion species such as HSeO3– is related to the point of
zero charge (PZC) of ferric oxyhydroxides. In this mechanism, the PZC of ferric oxyhydroxides is
close to the pH of the groundwater with the result that there is a non-negligible fraction of positively
charged surface sites that can bind anions.
In many cases, the CEC of rock samples reported in literature sources were somewhat higher than
the most likely CEC range of the Forsmark metagranite rock type. The use of a CEC transfer factor
therefore was generally found to give a lower Kd range than assuming that the CEC has no effect.
For this reason, in cases where there is a reasonable expectation that sorption might be related to
biotite content, the CEC transfer factor has been cautiously applied. In cases where there is no strong
evidence to suggest that sorption should be related to CEC, the transfer factor has not been used. The
decision whether or not to use the transfer factor in recommending Kd ranges was however, handled
on a case by case basis in a partially subjective manner.



1
    SEM-EDX (Scanning Electron Microscope Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy).


R-10-48                                                                                                69
Calculation of the groundwater chemistry transfer factor, fchem
As discussed previously in Section 2.1.4, the primary variables pH and dissolved carbonate concen-
tration (or pCO2) are expected to have most influence on the sorption of surface complexing solutes.
In this compilation, redox is considered separately and on a case by case basis. The predominant
redox speciation is estimated by consideration of redox potentials predicted for projected in situ
conditions at different times during the geochemical evolution of the repository environment. For
radionuclides that sorb by way of an ion-exchange mechanism, on the other hand, the presence of
competing cations is expected to have the greatest influence on sorptivity.
In many cases, pH and carbonate concentrations used in laboratory investigations are sufficiently
different to those predicted for the repository environment that this needs to be considered as a
factor when recommending Kd ranges for use in safety assessment calculations. In this context it is
also important to consider possible differences in the specified groundwater composition prior to
commencement of laboratory sorption measurements and at the conclusion of the experiment which
might be many months apart. If there is uncertainty concerning the composition of contact solutions
during sorption experiments, this uncertainty is unavoidably propagated into the ranges of sorption
Rd values derived in the laboratory investigation.
There are a number of ways in which small differences in groundwater chemistry can have an impact
upon Kd values. The most obvious are speciation effects whereby changes in, for example, pH or
carbonate concentration change the relative abundance of various complexed forms of the radionu-
clide in solution. This can be viewed as an indirect competitive effect whereby dissolved ligands in
the groundwater compete with surface reactive groups to bind the radionuclide. If there is a sufficient
concentration of competing ligands in solution the concentration of the free radionuclide species
may decrease to such an extent that sorption is reduced. For radionuclides that are less influenced
by carbonate complexation, increased carbonate levels may decrease the sorptivity of groundwater
solutes that compete directly for binding sites and thus enhance sorptivity of the radionuclide indi-
rectly. On the other hand, dissolved ligands such as carbonate can also enhance sorption by way of
forming ternary surface complexes with the dissolved radionuclide. The formation of ternary uranyl
/Bargar et al. 1999/ and neptunyl /Arai et al. 2007/ carbonate complexes on hematite, for example,
has been directly confirmed by spectroscopic measurements. Another way in which altered carbonate
concentration can impact upon sorptivity is if carbonate species form independent surface complexes
themselves in a competitive fashion with radionuclides (mainly relevant for oxyanions).
Given these different modes of action it is therefore difficult to predict, a priori, the effect of changed
carbonate concentration unless very detailed knowledge of the identity of sorbing species is known
since this can lead to both an increase or a decrease in sorptivity depending upon the particular reac-
tion mechanisms involved. The presence of other solutes at elevated concentrations can also have an
adverse impact on sorptivity due to competition for surface sites even if the competing solute sorbs
less strongly. Direct competition for sorption sites with major groundwater cations is expected to be
the principal mechanism affecting the sorption of ion-exchanging solutes.
Even if the sorption mechanism is such that only ligand competition in the aqueous phase needs
to be considered (i.e. no direct competition for surface sites), it is difficult to predict the impact
of altered speciation owing to the coupled nature of the reactions describing sorption and solution
speciation. As an example, it is interesting to consider the case of Am sorption on site specific rocks
from Forsmark and Laxemar in contact with fresh and saline groundwaters. The fresh groundwater
type used in the laboratory investigations has a dissolved carbonate concentration roughly 12 times
greater than the saline groundwater. In many models described in the literature, the sorption of Am is
modelled assuming that free Am3+ ions bind to negatively charged surface hydroxyl sites according
to a simple binary reaction template (e.g. /Wang and Anderko 2001/). Given that the speciation of Am
can be dominated by carbonate complex forms in groundwater with elevated carbonate concentra-
tions, this would suggest that the sorptivity of Am might be reduced in fresh water since one would
expect relatively greater sequestration of Am in non-reactive carbonate forms. In fact, by comparing
the speciation of Am in both groundwater types, one would naively expect the sorptivity of Am in
fresh water to be reduced by at least three orders of magnitude due to direct competition by carbon-
ate ligands. In the Forsmark and Laxemar site specific data for Am sorption, however, it is clear that
the Rd values for saline conditions are about 30% less than those for fresh water (this appears to be
a consistent result for both sites even given the uncertainty in contact water composition).


70                                                                                                 R-10-48
Even seemingly small changes in speciation resulting from the use of a different thermodynamic
database in predictive modelling compared to that originally used for model fitting can have a
relatively large impact on simulated groundwater compositions and predicted sorptivity. Although
not strictly applicable to granite, it is useful to consider the surface complexation model for Am
sorption on alumina described in /Wang and Anderko 2001/. Using this model it is predicted that
the Kd should be about 70% greater in fresh water than for the saline water when using the NEA
thermodynamic database /Hummel et al. 2002/. If, on the other hand, the SKB thermodynamic
database /Duro et al. 2006/ is used, the predicted Kd is found to be roughly 30% less in fresh water
than saline water. Although, this is a relatively small change it is important to acknowledge nonethe-
less that this is a qualitatively contrary result which has non-trivial implications if used as a basis for
interpreting sorption experiment outcomes. The difference appears to be related to small numerical
differences in the complexation constants for the various Am(III) species recognised by the NEA
and SKB databases. It is therefore of some importance that internally consistent data sets are used
if thermodynamic modelling is to be used to predict groundwater chemistry transfer factors for use
in safety assessment modelling. This argument can also be extended to include the requirement that
the groundwater compositions used in laboratory investigations are reliably quantified so that the
resulting surface complexation model isn’t parameterised with binding constants that are biased by
inaccurate solution concentration data.
The relation between groundwater compositions used in the site descriptive modelling laboratory
investigations and those predicted for the SR-Site temperate time domain /Salas et al. 2010/ are
shown in Figure 5-3 (2,000 y) and Figure 5-4 (9,000 y). The pH was measured at the conclusion
of the sorption experiments for a small number of control cases for the purpose of quality control.
As can be seen from the data in Figure 5-3 and Figure 5-4, there was a non-negligible drift in pH
observed during the sorption experiments carried out for the Forsmark and Laxemar site investiga-
tions which, in some cases was as much as 1.5 pH units. Although part of the variation might be
related to small differences in operator technique or pH electrode calibration between the two
institutions contracted to perform the measurements, the drift appears to be systematic, consistently
positive (only one exception in the case of Saline water from Laxemar) and of sufficient magnitude
to significantly confound mechanistic interpretation of the results.
In Figure 5-3 and Figure 5-4, the drift in pH has been interpreted as being related to a re-equilibra-
tion of the solution with a lower pCO2 in the headspace of the sample vessels and glove box. This,
however, is purely speculative and as noted previously in Section 5.1.1, there are alternative explana-
tions for the pH drift that could potentially reproduce the observed behaviour without a net change
in pCO2. Moreover, it is not possible to make any quantitative estimates since the actual CO2 partial
pressure in the glove box is unknown and for much of the contact time (except during sampling) the
groundwater rock suspensions were in sealed test tubes with limited head space.
Even in the absence of pH drift and associated CO2 gas re-equilibration, the parameter space
sampled in the site laboratory investigations is sufficiently dissimilar to the projected in situ
conditions for SR-Site that there is some uncertainty concerning transferability of the Rd data to
SR-Site groundwater conditions. In much of the data reported in the literature, it is not always clear
if groundwater compositions are specified for starting solutions or for final compositions measured
analytically at the conclusion of the experiments. The interpretation of results is therefore fraught
with considerable uncertainty.
If reliable thermodynamic sorption models were available for the surface complexation of individual
radionuclides it is possible, in principal, to calculate a theoretical response surface for the variation
of Kd with changes in pH and dissolved carbonate and use this as the basis to calculate appropriate
groundwater chemistry transfer factors. Although not used to estimate transfer factors in the sense
that they are discussed here, /Turner and Pabalan 1999/ have proposed the use of thermodynamic
sorption models in combination with statistics of measured (or modelled) groundwater compositional
data to predict probability distributions of site specific Kd values. This is the essence of the concept
referred to informally in the literature as the smart Kd approach (e.g. /Kulik 2002/). The idea is
considered to have sufficient merit that a considerable amount of effort has been applied in recent
years towards placing these ideas on a more robust footing /NEA 2005, Ochs et al. 2006a/.




R-10-48                                                                                                  71
                    -1


                  -1.5


                    -2                Marine

                                                        Saline (Forsmark)
                  -2.5
                             Brine




log10pCO2 (atm)
                    -3                                                       Fresh

                                                               Type V
                  -3.5


                    -4


                  -4.5         Saline (Laxemar)


                    -5


                  -5.5


                    -6
                         6   6.5         7        7.5           8            8.5     9    9.5    10
                                                              pH

 Figure 5‑3. Cross-plot of pCO2 (log10-units) vs. pH for characteristic groundwater types used in site
 descriptive modelling laboratory investigations (large triangular markers). The pH drift measured at
 the conclusion of the sorption experiments for a small number of control cases is indicated using small
 circular markers. The square marker shows the theoretical composition of the contact solutions after re-
 equilibration of specified solution compositions calculated using PHREEQC. The trajectory of the plotted
 values (solid lines) assumes degassing to a lower pCO2 is responsible for the observed pH drift although
 other interpretations are possible. The small grey markers in the background show 1,000 randomly selected
 groundwater compositions projected for the SR-Site temperate time domain at 2,000 y.


                   -1


                  -1.5                             Marine


                   -2
                                                        Saline (Forsmark)
                  -2.5       Brine




log10pCO2 (atm)
                   -3                                                       Fresh

                                                              Type V
                  -3.5


                   -4


                  -4.5         Saline (Laxemar)


                   -5


                  -5.5


                   -6
                         6   6.5        7         7.5          8            8.5      9   9.5    10

                                                             pH

 Figure 5‑4. Same as previous figure although compared against 1,000 randomly selected groundwater
 compositions projected for the SR-Site temperate time domain at 9,000 y.



 72                                                                                                   R-10-48
Thermodynamic modelling has been previously deployed with some success for the prediction of Kd
values for site specific groundwater compositions in contact with bentonite /Bradbury and Baeyens
1997, 2005a, b/ and more recently for illite /Bradbury and Baeyens 2009a, b/. The method was also
used by /Ochs and Talerico 2004, Ochs et al. 2006b/ to calculate Kd values appropriate for com-
pacted bentonite buffer materials under site specific groundwater conditions for use in the SR-Can
safety assessment /SKB 2006/. The same approach is also used in the current safety assessment
SR-Site as documented in the Data report /SKB 2010b/.
This outcome can also be achieved if a sufficient number of sorption measurements are available for
different groundwater parameter combinations that an empirical response surface based upon least
squares regression can be estimated. This latter approach was used by /Vandergraaf et al. 1993/ to
construct a far-field sorption database for crystalline rock. The quality of the calculated response sur-
face, however, is only as good as the data used to constrain it and there is considerable opportunity
for confounding factors and errors relating to the use of small data sets to influence the results. This,
however, is also true of thermodynamic sorption models.
This should not be taken to indicate a diminishment of the detailed work carried out previously and
described above. It is merely a restatement of the realities involved in attempting to characterise the
sorptive properties of complex, heterogeneous rock matrices. Although the parametric models devel-
oped by /Vandergraaf et al. 1993/ were painstakingly assembled and methodologically robust, they still
suffer from many of the same issues that plague the application of more sophisticated thermodynamic
sorption models in safety assessment; i.e. the typically small number of rock samples represented in the
underlying data sets and the minimal nature of the experimental designs mandated by the laboratory
investigations to characterise the impact of key variables on many different radionuclides.
The fundamental lesson is that uncertainties implied by the variation of the key variables within para-
metric or thermodynamic models for projected in situ conditions most likely do not always reflect the
true range of uncertainty. Probabilistic assessments based only on consideration of visible (or known)
uncertainties therefore run the risk of considerably underestimating radiological risks associated with
modelled scenarios. In the strategy for assessment of migration properties in bentonite /Ochs and
Talerico 2004/, expert judgement is brought to bear on the problem by way of introducing additional
uncertainty factors to expand the range of overall Kd uncertainty. Compacted bentonite, however, is
a far more chemically homogeneous material than igneous bedrock with regard to sorption reactions.
A particular problem for the igneous rock types is that there are currently no thermodynamic models
of acceptable accuracy that describe the sorption of solutes on the most active mineral phases that
appear to dominate sorptivity. Moreover, as outlined previously with regard to the CEC transfer
factor, it is not even clear in some cases which mineral phase dominates the sorptivity of the rock or
whether significant errors are introduced by disregarding armouring2 effects when assuming linear
additivity of sorptive properties in complex mineral mixtures such as granite. Although there have
been large advances in the past few years, surface complexation models for crystalline rock do not
appear to be sufficiently robust at this time to predict groundwater chemistry transfer factors for use
in safety assessment calculations.
If satisfactory empirical or thermodynamic models of sorption were available it would be possible
to estimate a groundwater chemistry transfer factor by estimating a theoretical value for the Kd
under the application conditions and comparing this with the theoretical Kd value for a reference
groundwater. The chemistry transfer factor can then be defined as:
           K d( app )
f chem =                									(5-9)
           K d( ref )

Given that the selected contact groundwater compositions do not span the application groundwater
compositions very well, and since the actual pH and carbonate concentrations in the laboratory
experiments appear to be in some doubt, it does not seem appropriate at this time to use an empirical
response surface for the calculation of fchem for surface complexing radionuclides.

2
 Armouring – when the surface of one mineral is enclosed or occluded by another mineral in such a way that
its surface reactivity or interfacial access to matrix porosity is less than that which would be predicted for the
mineral given its crystal size and relative abundance in the rock.


R-10-48                                                                                                              73
Since there appears to be no acceptably reliable model (thermodynamic or empirical) that can account
for uncertainty relating to groundwater composition in the case of the main surface complexing solutes
studied in this compilation, the only option is to assume that all uncertainties relating to groundwater
chemistry are internalised in the ranges of uncertainty of data sets used to recommend Kd ranges. For most
surface complexing radionuclides this implies a pooling of data for all available groundwater composi-
tions. If the application groundwater compositions are too different from those compositions for which
measurement data are available, this represents a significant and presently unquantifiable uncertainty.
Although the specific groundwater compositions used in experiments might potentially introduce such
a bias, it is thought that the compositional variability of contact solutions is sufficiently large that the
assumption is probably not unreasonable (given also that the small liquid volumes used in batch experi-
ments do not constitute a large buffering capacity with regard to reactive processes and gas exchange).
For radionuclides that sorb by way of an ion-exchange mechanism, on the other hand, the pH and car-
bonate concentration are expected to play a subordinate role. In these cases, direct competitive effects
with the major groundwater cations Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, K+ are expected to have a dominant impact on
sorption. Although small changes in concentration might occur due to weathering reactions, these are
likely to be minor relative to the large background concentration already existing in the groundwater
types (particularly for the more saline groundwaters). A simple, single site cation exchange model
has been developed previously for fine grained granite and diorite samples taken from the Äspö HRL
/Byegård et al. 1998/ and in an earlier work for Finnsjön granite /Byegård et al. 1995/. The selectivity
constants and other model parameters for these rock types are given in Table 5-5.
There are a number of uncertainties associated with the quantification of the selectivity coefficients
in Table 5-5. For ion exchanging solutes one of the chief concerns is diffusive disequilibrium.
Since pH drift and accompanying CO2 re-equilibration are not expected to have a large impact on
ion-exchange properties, data for the smallest size fraction and longest contact time would appear
to be the most appropriate choice if the aim is to minimise possible bias due to diffusion. The
particular data sets given in Table 5-5 are selected bearing this in mind. Data are given in the original
references, however, for a number of different particle sizes and contact times. The larger selectivity
coefficients estimated for Rb+ and Cs+ in association with Äspö fine-grained granite and diorite (i.e.
relative to Finnsjön granite) could be related to diffusive disequilibrium given the different contact
times used in the experiments.

Table 5-5. Selectivity coefficients (defined according to the Gaines-Thomas convention and rela-
tive to Ca2+) and other parameters for the single site ion-exchange model derived for fine-grained
granite and diorite from Äspö /Byegård et al. 1998/, and Finnsjön granite /Byegård et al. 1995/.
Error estimates are given as 2σ values based upon the standard deviation of 2–4 replicate sam-
ples for the fine-grained granite and diorite samples. The calculation basis for error estimates are
not specified in /Byegård et al. 1995/ for Finnsjön granit.

Rock type                       Fine-grained granite   Diorite                     Granite
Source location                 Äspö                   Äspö                        Finnsjön
Pre-equilibration time          5 months               5 months                    1 week
Contact time                    14 days                14 days                     8 days
CEC (cmol/kg)                   6.8±1.0                9.1±0.6                     0.44±0.06
Biotite content (%wt)           ~1%                    17%-25%                     4%-6%
Size fraction                   0.045 – 0.09 mm        0.045 – 0.09 mm             0.09 – 0.25 mm


Selectivity coefficients, Kc:


Na+                             2±1                    0.1±0.05                    0.025±0.009
Mg2+                            n/a                    n/a                         11±2.2
K+                              n/a                    n/a                         66±4.7
Rb+                             (2±0.1)×103            (8±0.4)×103                 730±210
Ca2+                            1                      1                           1
Sr2+                            4±1                    2±0.4                       1.8±0.3
Cs+                             (9±0.6)×106            (90±2)×106                  (32±6.9)×103
Ba2+                            60±4                   60±2                        53±14




74                                                                                                  R-10-48
Another problem is the fact that biotite, being more fine grained than feldspar and other tectosilicate
minerals has a tendency to be enriched in the smallest crushed size fractions. It is also possible that the
biotite grains in the smaller size fractions are more damaged and have a greater proportion of frayed
edge site than those in larger size fractions. This could be a potential source of bias for rocks with
relatively high biotite contents if Kd values were to be abstracted directly for use in transport calcula-
tions. However, since we are only interested in calculating the relative change in Kd between different
groundwater compositions to calculate fchem, this should not have an impact on the results provided the
difference in CEC is not so large that it significantly perturbs the contact water compositions.
Other possible issues concern:
• The accuracy with which solution compositions can be determined by analytical methods and
  the manner in which these uncertainties are propagated in mass balances used to quantify the
  exchange process.
• The potential for formation of precipitates such as barite and calcite as well as their solid solu-
  tions with Sr2+. This could be partially ruled out in /Byegård et al. 1995, 1998/ by geochemical
  reasoning related to observations of cation desorption/dilution behaviour in response to rinsing
  with distilled water.
•   The neglection of activity coefficients in the estimation procedure (both for the solution and solid
    phases).
•   The mechanistic simplification implied by the assumption of a single-site cation exchange model.
Although there are a number of uncertainties associated with the quantification of selectivity coefficients
in Table 5-5, it is thought that the data are sufficiently accurate that approximate chemistry transfer factors
can be calculated for Cs+, Sr2+, and Ra2+ (assuming geochemical analogy between Ra2+ and Ba2+) without
introducing large errors. For the purpose of making estimates of fchem in this data compilation, the selectiv-
ity coefficients for Äspö diorite were chosen as a basis for the calculations. A problem associated with this
data set is that selectivities for Mg2+ and K+ were not included. These missing reactions were accounted
for by importing the corresponding selectivity coefficients measured for Finnsjön granite. Although this
could be considered to be the use of internally inconsistent data sets, it is thought that Mg2+ and K+ overall
play a sufficiently minor role that the error introduced is relatively small.
The Forsmark saline groundwater was chosen as the reference groundwater since this has an ionic
strength deemed to be closest to the projected groundwater composition under application conditions.
Typically, there were also a larger number of sorption measurements performed on site specific mate-
rials and saline groundwater than for the other groundwater types which makes it an obvious choice
(in terms of statistical suitability) for extrapolation of uncertainty distributions to other groundwater
compositions. The only exception was for Sr where the fresh groundwater type was assumed as the
reference. This was due to that the Rd measurements for saline groundwaters were sufficiently close to
the detection limit that sorption could not be statistically quantified (see Appendix P).
The applicability of the resulting ion-exchange model and impact of various uncertainties has been
tested in two ways:
• Comparing estimated Kd values extrapolated from saline groundwater with the measurement data
  for the other groundwater types not used in the extrapolation (only the reference groundwater data
  set are used in the extrapolation to application conditions). Comparison with the empirical data for
  the unused data sets therefore provides an independent quality control check on the applicability of
  the results. The comparison is made by plotting both the simulated data and empirical measurement
  data against ionic strength. If the simulated data line up in reasonable agreement along the qualitative
  ionic strength trend implied by the experimental data sets, then the model is deemed acceptable. This
  may be considered to be a consistency check on the epistemic uncertainty of the proposed model.
•   Random perturbation of selectivity coefficients, Kc assuming independent and lognormally distributed
    uncertainty distributions calculated on the basis of the error estimates given in Table 5-5. Since
    the analytical methods used are expected to give rise to normally-distributed errors, the selectivity
    constants being defined as ratios of these variables are consequently expected to be lognormally
    distributed. Comparison of fchem distributions calculated using the central values and stochastically
    perturbed values gives an indication of the aleatory uncertainty of the proposed model (i.e. insofar that
    the error estimates given for the selectivity coefficients are approximately order of magnitude correct).


R-10-48                                                                                                     75
 Further details of the data qualification procedure can be found in the individual appendices dealing
 with the derivation of Kd values for Sr, Cs, and Ra sorption. A typical result of the calculations is
 shown in Figure 5-5 for Ra sorption where fchem is plotted against ionic strength (logarithmic axes)
 for various groundwater compositions projected for the temperate case at different times.
 In the case of Ni (which does exhibit a mild ionic strength dependency), it is not possible to use an
 ion exchange model to extrapolate to application conditions since there are no selectivity coefficients
 available for Ni sorption. Furthermore, it is not clear whether the sorption of Ni can be adequately
 described by a simple ion-exchange model or whether it should be modelled as a surface complexa-
 tion reaction featuring roughly equally balanced outer-sphere and inner-sphere contributions. From
 the spectroscopic studies reported in the literature /Scheidegger et al. 1996, Elzinga and Sparks 1999/,
 it would appear that the latter mechanism is more likely. It is also not clear whether the trend is a true
 ionic strength dependency, or whether it is related to hydrolysis of the Ni2+ cation where pH is a latent
 variable correlated with ionic strength. In this particular case, a simplified empirical regression of Rd
 values as a function of ionic strength has been used to estimate Kd values for application conditions.
 Full details concerning this particular case can be found in Appendix M.
 In general, the average shift in the central Kd estimate obtained by convolution of the individual
 probability density functions describing Kd0 and fchem is small relative to the level of overall uncertainty
 in the uncorrected data sets. Counterintuitively, the solutes that are most strongly influenced by ionic
 strength on account of their weak sorptivity exhibit a smaller shift than more strongly sorbing solutes
 that are less affected by ionic strength. This due to the larger underlying data uncertainty in the case of
 the more weakly sorbing solutes which tends to drown out the systematic trends that can be quantita-
 tively related to evolving groundwater salinity. This should not be taken to mean that ionic strength is
 less important for the weakly sorbing solutes, but rather that the effect is more difficult to quantify for
 weakly sorbing solutes relative to the more strongly sorbing solutes.


              1.5




                1

                                                        9000 y



              0.5


log10 fchem
                                                                        3000 y




                0

                                        5000 y


              -0.5

                                                                                        2000 y



               -1
                     -2   -1.8   -1.6   -1.4     -1.2     -1     -0.8   -0.6     -0.4       -0.2   0

                                           log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

 Figure 5‑5. Typical groundwater chemistry transfer factors, fchem calculated for Ra sorption and applica-
 tion groundwater conditions in the temperate case study. The plotted data represent 10,000 randomly
 selected groundwater compositions calculated individually for each case using PHREEQC and the assumed
 ion exchange model. Data are given for 2,000 y (lime green markers), 3,000 y (dark green), 5,000 y (blue),
 9,000 y (red). The plotted data, although partially obscuring each other gives an idea of the system-wide,
 relative variation of fchem at different times implying a trend towards increased Kd values over time owing to
 decreasing groundwater salinity.



 76                                                                                                    R-10-48
It must also be remembered that since the changes in groundwater composition are not resolved on
the level of individual migration paths, extrapolation to the groundwater situations existing at dif-
ferent times must consider the statistical distribution of spatially variable groundwater compositions
throughout the entire repository volume which, in itself, introduces additional statistical dispersion
in the calculation of Kd uncertainty ranges. It is therefore important when discussing the impact
of evolving groundwater chemistry to distinguish between the true impact of ionic strength on the
sorption process as it actually occurs from the impact that is statistically quantifiable for modelling
purposes. Local changes in groundwater salinity are therefore likely to have a much more profound
impact on sorptivity than has been quantified in the Kd recommendation. Since the Kd data are
recommended for relatively saline conditions, this also means that the strength of sorption will be
pessimistically underestimated during the bulk of repository evolution.


5.1.2 Possible biases in the quantification of radionuclide retention
The principal biases and uncertainties which might affect the magnitude of the appropriate Kd
value for use in calculations have been outlined in previous sections. These biases concern both the
extrapolation of data from laboratory investigations to application conditions in situ as well as the
correct identification of sorptive retention processes in the laboratory. Here, the term bias is used
to describe the various epistemic uncertainties (i.e. relating to a lack of knowledge) concerning the
sorption processes as they are quantified and extrapolated from one reference condition to another.
The most important characteristics of these biases are summarised in the following Sections.


Measurement of sorption
As outlined previously, laboratory sorption measurements are typically carried out on crushed rock
samples for different contact times and groundwater compositions. The use of crushed materials is
dictated by the need to minimise diffusive disequilibrium effects so that sorption measurements can
be made in a realistic time frame. In most cases, the apparent partitioning ratio, Rd is then estimated
by way of a radiometric mass balance relating the initial and final activity of the contacting solution
with the amount of solute sorbed. Usually the amount sorbed is not measured directly, so the
accuracy with which the initial and final solution activity can be quantified is of great importance for
the overall accuracy of the Rd estimate.
If the activity variance of the initial blank solutions (i.e. reference solutions without added geological
material) is sufficiently large relative to the final activity of the solution with geological materials
added, then it might not be possible to quantify the existence of sorption in a statistical sense.
Variations in the activity of the blank arise owing to issues of instrumental measurement precision
as well as sorption of solutes on vessels or test-tube walls. This is a particular problem for strongly
sorbing solutes which often necessitates the use of acidified blank solutions. Similarly, if the strength
of sorption is sufficiently high that the remaining solute in the contact solution is at or below the
limit of detection, then it may not be possible to quantify an upper limit to the Rd value. In a practical
sense, this means that it is often difficult to reliably quantify the Rd of solutes much lower than about
10–4 m3/kg or larger than ~1 m3/kg.
As a direct consequence, it may not be possible to identify a lower limit for the sorption of certain
solutes that sorb only weakly. In some cases this results in the assignment of non-sorbing status for
solutes where sorption cannot be effectively quantified. For very strongly sorbing solutes, on the other
hand, the inability to adequately establish an upper limit for sorptivity frequently results in the trunca-
tion of Kd ranges at lower levels than what might be physically motivated. Although the truncated
upper limit of a high Kd data range is not in itself a problem, stochastic simulations will be biased
towards lower values than what might be realistic thereby unnecessarily inflating risk estimates.
Other issues that compromise the soundness of sorption measurements include; 1) the possible bias
introduced by incorrectly characterising precipitation or co-precipitation processes as ion-exchange
or surface complexation sorptive processes, and 2) the formation of pseudo-colloids and eigencol-
loids during experiments if not correctly accounted for in data evaluation. If colloids are incorrectly
identified as belonging to the solid phase (i.e. after ultra-filtration or centrifugation) sorption will be
overestimated. If, on the other hand, colloids are identified as being part of the dissolved concentra-
tion in the aqueous phase, sorption will be underestimated.


R-10-48                                                                                                  77
Correct identification of redox species during laboratory experiments is a particular issue for the
redox sensitive solutes. It is generally difficult to determine whether redox potentials are sufficiently
low to maintain a reducing form for those solutes that are redox sensitive. For the radionuclides of
interest in safety assessment this may lead to an underestimate of sorptivity if the redox potential is
not sufficiently low to guarantee predominance of the (usually more strongly sorbing) reduced form.
This is handled on a case by case basis and is documented in the appendices to this report.


Extrapolation of data to site-specific conditions
The crushing of rock materials results in the creation of new mineral surfaces that are not representa-
tive of the undisturbed in situ rock. This may include both freshly cleaved mineral surfaces as well
as surfaces belonging to previously unconnected pore spaces in the rock matrix. Sorption might also
occur preferentially in association with one, or more mineral phases which may not comprise more
than a few percent of the total mineralogical composition of the rock. These minerals also typically
dominate the cation exchange capacity (CEC) of the rock. The cation exchange capacities of rocks
used in laboratory investigations are also not necessarily representative of the particular site specific
rock types of importance. Sorption data derived from laboratory investigations are corrected for both
surface area effects and CEC to more accurately represent in situ sorption properties of the intact
rock matrix under application conditions.
As outlined in previous sections, the surface area of rock is typically assessed using the BET method.
This gives an approximate estimate of the total surface area which can then be used to approximately
relate the sorptive properties of different rock types and crushed size fractions, although does not
give any information concerning the surface area of minerals that actually dominate sorption. As
a consequence, mechanical transfer factors used to correct for differences in surface area between
crushed and in situ rock may result in lower Kd estimates than what might be physically motivated.
Further corrections made using CEC transfer factors assume that these corrections can be applied
independently and in a multiplicative fashion thereby disregarding any correlation between these
two variables. Since some correlation between sorptive surface area and CEC is considered likely,
this may also lead to Kd estimates that, while defensible for safety assessment purposes, may be
over-pessimistic with regard to physical realism.


Issues of statistical sample size (number)
It is probable that there is some degree of bias in the estimated uncertainty distributions for data obtained
from literature sources since these are generally based on much smaller sample sets representing a
restricted range of varied experimental parameters as compared to the site specific data sets. To account
for the sample size biasing effect of the typically small data sets reported in the literature sources, the
uncertainty of the mechanical and CEC transfer factors are fully propagated in the calculations to give an
expanded uncertainty interval in the final data range. This was achieved using a re-sampling technique
based on aggregation of the underlying uncertainty distributions for individual data points (assuming a
Gaussian mixture model for uncertainty aggregation).
Since a large amount of variation was already apparent in the site specific data sets this technique
was not deemed necessary in those cases and only the central best estimates for the mechanical and
CEC transfer factor was used (i.e. for Sr, Cs, Ra, Ni, Am/Eu, U(VI), Np(VI)). This was considered
justified since the propagation of the correction factor uncertainties might otherwise give over-
inflated Kd data ranges.


Time dependent behaviour
A particular bias that has not been considered in the data assessment, concerns the interpretation of time
dependent behaviour in laboratory measurements. The Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation data
consisted of Rd values measured for different crushed size fractions and a geometric time schedule for
contact times ranging from 1–180 days. However, since the time dependent behaviour in the raw data
sets for site data appears to be a minor component of the overall variability/uncertainty, the data sets are
considered in their entirety without any filtering with regard to particle size or contact time.




78                                                                                                   R-10-48
Generally it was found that attempts to fit the data to simplified models of time dependent behaviour
(i.e. modelling of diffusive disequilibrium) gave rise to non-cautious Kd ranges owing to the uncer-
tainty of other model parameters required to make the fit. A pronounced pH drift of up to 1.5 pH
units was also documented in control samples at the conclusion of the sorption experiments which
confers additional doubt on the assumption of diffusive disequilibrium being the sole mechanism for
the observed time dependent behaviour in a number of cases.



5.2       Sorption data for specific radionuclides of interest
This section contains a brief overview of the main features of each radionuclide, or analogue group,
designated as being of importance in the SR-Site safety assessment. This includes a basic description
of the chemical reactive characteristics of each nuclide as well as a brief overview of data sources
and principal uncertainties. More detailed information for each nuclide or analogue group may be
found in the Appendices to this report.
As a basis for discussing the geochemical characteristics of each element, speciation calculations have
been made for two representative groundwater compositions. The first is a highly saline groundwater
with an ionic strength of roughly 1 M. The other is a fresh (i.e. non-saline) groundwater of ionic
strength 6.4×10–3 M with the same composition as the fresh groundwater end-member used in the
laboratory sorption studies carried out during the site investigations (see Table 3-5). The calculations
were made for pH varied in the interval 7–9 with redox conditions determined by the same redox
pairs as used in SR-Site hydrochemistry simulations /Salas et al. 2010/.


5.2.1 Americium (Am) and other trivalent actinides and lanthanides
Owing to the strong analogue chemistry of the trivalent actinides and lanthanides (as discussed in
Section 3.2.1), sorption data for the pooled set of Am(III) and Eu(III) measurement data obtained
from the site investigations are considered to be suitable for the selection of Kd values to represent
the group as a whole. For the purposes of SR-Site, this group includes the nuclides of Ac, Am, Cm,
Eu, Ho, Pu, Sm.
For the trivalent actinides and lanthanides, carbonate complexation in the aqueous phase is expected
to exert a relatively strong competitive effect for binding of the free solute (e.g. Am3+). Based on
speciation calculations made using PHREEQC and the SKB-TDB /Duro et al. 2006/, the mono-
carbonate complex AmCO3+ is expected to be the predominant aqueous specie for most groundwater
compositions likely to be encountered. The relative importance of hydroxo- and carbonato-complexes,
however, varies as a function of pH and total carbonate concentration which needs to be taken into
consideration when discussing the speciation of Am(III). Different thermodynamic databases also
appear to give different predictions on the relative importance of chloride complexation. The SKB-
TDB, for example, predicts a relatively minor role for AmCl2+ although with greater predominance for
pH lower than 7. Use of the NEA thermodynamic database (NEA-TDB) /Hummel et al. 2002/, on the
other hand, predicts a relatively stronger impact of chloride complexation owing to a difference in the
equilibrium constants assigned for this reaction. All of the major aqueous complexes are cationic.
Sorption of elements belonging to this group is thought to be governed by an inner sphere surface compl-
exation mechanism and it is consequently assumed that ionic strength effects can be neglected. If sorption
occurs by binary surface complexation of the free metal ion with surface hydroxyl ligands, increased
carbonate concentration is expected to decrease the Kd owing to competitive effects by aqueous phase
complexation. It is interesting to note that although ternary carbonato- and hydroxo-carbonato surface
complexes of Eu(III) have been inferred from spectroscopic measurements on phyllosilicates /Stumpf
et al. 2002, Marques Fernandes et al. 2008, Fernandes et al. 2010/, there are no recognized analogous
aqueous phase reactions for the formation of hydroxo-carbonato complexes in the above-mentioned
thermodynamic databases that would strongly imply the possibility of this behaviour.
The site investigation data for Forsmark and Laxemar suggest a slightly reduced Kd value for fresh
water relative to saline groundwater possibly owing to the effect of carbonate complexation. The
effect, however, is weak relative to the overall data variability/uncertainty and cannot be accurately
related to solution composition owing to undocumented drift in contact solution properties during the


R-10-48                                                                                                 79
course of the experiments. For this reason, data for the Am(III)/Eu(III) analogue system are pooled
over all contact solutions and assumed to represent an overall uncertainty distribution arising due to
groundwater compositional uncertainty. A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended
Kd values for Am(III) and its analogues may be found in Appendix D.
A best estimate Kd value of 1.48×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for all
groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.83±0.72). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution
be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (5.74×10–4 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (3.83×10–1 m3/kg).


5.2.2 Cadmium (Cd)
The principal radioisotope of Cd is the 113mCd fission product. This isotope has a relatively short
half-life of 14.1 years and decays to the stable 113In isotope. Owing to its relatively short half-life
and because its decay product is a stable isotope, 113mCd is not expected to contribute significantly to
far field dose rates under normal geosphere transport scenarios and is only likely to be important for
accidental intrusion cases where geosphere transport is bypassed.
Cd is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Cd(II) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. In fresh groundwater the Cd2+ ion is expected to be the dominant
species for dissolved cadmium in the pH range 7–8, although generally shifting towards a predomi-
nance of the carbonate complex, CdCO3(aq) at pH greater than 8. Chloride complexation, however,
is relatively important for this element and the complexes CdCl2, CdCl+, CdCl3– are expected to be
dominant in groundwater of more saline character. Under strongly reducing conditions, the sulphide
complexes Cd(HS)2, CdHS+, Cd(HS)3–, Cd(HS)42– are expected to be important. The SKB-TDB only
considers the selenite and selenate complexes of Cd (i.e. CdSeO3, CdSeO4, Cd(SeO3)22–) on account
of the fact that 113Cd is not typically considered to be an important nuclide in far field transport
calculations and because these species may be of more relevance for Se speciation within a spent
fuel canister. The MinteqA2 database as distributed with PHREEQC was therefore used in speciation
calculations to form the basis for the above discussion on the relative importance of chloride and
carbonate complexation in groundwater. As noted above, the speciation of Cd in the geosphere is
considered less relevant on account of its short half-life and this discussion is therefore mostly of
interest with regard to the assessment of geochemical analogue behaviour.
Very little data appears to exist concerning the sorption of Cd on granitic rock types although there
is a substantially larger amount of data existing for sorption on single minerals such as goethite,
alumina, and silica. Although Cd shares certain geochemical similarities to Ni, this analogy is not
very good owing to the considerably larger ionic radius and weaker hydrolysis of Cd2+. Measurement
data reported by e.g. /Prelot et al. 2002/ exhibit a sensitivity to ionic strength which suggests a
predominantly ion-exchange, or outer-sphere surface complexation-based, sorption mechanism. In
the absence of reliable data for Cd, and owing to its lesser importance for geosphere transport, it is
recommended that sorption data for Ni is used for this nuclide.


5.2.3 Carbon-14 (14C)
Under normal granitic groundwater conditions, bicarbonate ion (HCO3–) is expected to be the dominant
dissolved species for the 14C fission product (half life 5,730 y). The transport of the bicarbonate ion is
difficult to model in the repository environment owing to isotope exchange with calcite minerals which
are ubiquitous in the advective pore space. This process is likely to give a non-negligible retardation of
14
  C transport. The adsorption of bicarbonate ion is postulated to occur by way of a surface complexa-
tion mechanism on both calcite /Van Cappellen et al. 1993/ as well as non-calcite minerals such as
ferrihydrite /Appelo et al. 2002/ and goethite /Villalobos and Leckie 2001/. In laboratory investigations
involving complex rock matrices such as granite, however, it is very difficult to distinguish true
adsorption owing to the generally very weak interaction of bicarbonate and the possibility of bias due
to carbonate mineral precipitation and exchange with inactive CO2 in the headspace of reaction vessels.
Sorption of bicarbonate has been measured by /Allard et al. 1981/ on crushed granitic rock and deemed
to be, for all practical purposes, non-sorbing (Kd = 0 m3/kg). In a later study, /Pinnioja et al. 1984/




80                                                                                                R-10-48
measured sorption on thin sections of Rapakivi granite and tonalite, also finding sorption to be negli-
gible. Parallel experiments using monolithic pieces of the above rock types identified weak sorption
associated with dark minerals (as ascertained by autoradiography). The authors speculate, however, that
the observed sorption in this case may be an artefact of carbonate mineral surface precipitation.
In the absence of unambiguous evidence indicating sorption of bicarbonate on granitic material, a Kd
of 0 m3/kg is therefore recommended for SR-Site transport calculations.


5.2.4 Cesium (Cs)
Radioisotopes of cesium are all fission products. The three isotopes of Cs in spent nuclear fuel have
respective half-lives of 2.065 y (134Cs), 2.3×106 y (135Cs), and 30.17 y (137Cs) /Audi et al. 2003/. The
principal radioisotope of interest in SR-Site is 135Cs on account of its long half-life.
Cs is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Cs(I) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. The Cs+ ion is expected to be the dominant species for dissolved
cesium under all foreseeable groundwater compositions, although with an increasing importance of
the chloride complex, CsCl in increasingly saline groundwater. Cs is highly soluble and there are no
solubility limiting minerals formed at the concentration levels likely to be encountered in SR-Site.
Cs(I) is expected to sorb by an ion-exchange mechanism and is known to sorb preferentially on
phyllosilicate minerals such as biotite and its alteration product chlorite. Cs+ is a relatively large
cation with an ionic radius of 1.67 Å. This means that it has weak ion-dipole interactions with water
and consequently, is weakly hydrated with a small hydrated radius. It can approach charged sites
more closely and thus associate more strongly than other competing ions that have a larger sphere
of hydration. This also implies that it competes strongly against other cations in groundwater for
electrostatic ion-exchange sites. This is particularly prominent in interlayer regions of biotite where
steric effects reduce access for competing cations.
The sorption of Cs(I) is highly non-linear owing to sorption on both frayed edge sites (FES) and phyl-
losilicate interlayers. Since the FES are much less abundant than the interlayer binding sites, the non-
linearity of the sorption isotherm extends to very low concentrations. This non-linearity is frequently
described using the Freundlich isotherm owing to its applicability over wide concentration ranges. The
natural background level of the non-radioactive isotope 133Cs is positively correlated with ionic strength
and varies between about 0.1 mg/l and 10 mg/l in Forsmark and Laxemar groundwater (see Appendix A).
It is the background concentration of the naturally occurring isotope that sets the appropriate con­
centration level for assessment of sorption since this is expected to far exceed the concentrations of
transported Cs radioisotopes. If Cs concentrations are sufficiently high, there is a theoretical possibility
of sorption irreversibility in phyllosilicate minerals with hydratable interlayers. This is due to collapse
of the layers when hydrated interlayer cations are displaced by weakly hydrated Cs+. Biotite, however,
owing to its non-hydratable interlayer structure is not expected to behave in this manner.
Although phyllosilicate minerals exhibit strong selectivity for Cs+, high concentrations of competing
ion-exchanging solutes (Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, K+) reduce the sorptivity of Cs(I). This gives rise to a
strong anti-correlation of sorptivity with increasing ionic strength. In this compilation, the effect
of ionic strength has been quantified by introducing a chemistry transfer factor to account for ion-
exchange competition. The chemistry transfer factor was calculated using statistics of groundwater
compositional variability together with a simplified ion-exchange model (see Section 5.1.1). The
correction implied by the chemistry transfer factor is small relative to the overall uncertainty of
the Kd estimate for Cs(I) sorption and amounts to (on average) no more than a factor of about two
shift of the best estimate Kd value for the range of salinities encountered during the temperate time
domain relative to the least favourable groundwater composition at 3,000 y.
The temporal variability of the salinity field surrounding the repository, however, is not uniform and the
application of the chemistry transfer factor mostly results in a broadening of the uncertainty distribution.
This is particularly true at later times where there is a larger range of salinities resulting from the
diversity of hydrodynamic resistances characterising recharge flowpaths. Flowpaths transecting the
repository that have low hydrodynamic resistance (small F-factors) can be expected to undergo greater
temporal changes in salinity than flowpaths featuring high hydrodynamic resistance (large F-factors),
where salinity levels may not change significantly. Since the temporal changes in groundwater chemistry


R-10-48                                                                                                  81
are not spatially resolved to individual radionuclide release locations, however, the overall distribution of
groundwater compositions must be considered as part of an overall uncertainty associated with the use
of a conditional Kd value to represent the average properties of flowpaths within the geosphere. A more
detailed account of the derivation of recommended Kd values for Cs(I) may be found in Appendix E.
Since temporally variable Kd values cannot be modelled effectively in the current generation of
safety assessment codes, Kd values are recommended for the most saline conditions expected during
the repository groundwater evolution. A best estimate Kd value of 3.49×10–4 m3/kg is therefore
recommended for the Forsmark site for the most saline groundwater conditions expected at 3,000 y.
The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –3.46±0.51). For
stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space
between the 2.5% (3.46×10–5 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (3.52×10–3 m3/kg).
The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended Kd range being shifted
upwards by roughly 0.3 log units for calculations involving the Laxemar site. This corresponds to an
approximate doubling of the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.


5.2.5 Chlorine (Cl)
The main species of the 36Cl fission product (half-life 3.01×105 y) is expected to be chloride ion,
Cl–. For the purposes of safety assessment, the chloride ion, Cl– can be reasonably assumed to be
non-sorbing. A Kd value of 0 m3/kg is therefore recommended for this species.


5.2.6 Lead (Pb)
Radioisotopes of lead arise in the decay chains of 238U, 235U, and 232Th. The main radioisotope of
interest for geosphere transport, however, is the 210Pb daughter product of the 238U decay chain.
Although the other radioisotopes of Pb (214Pb, 211Pb, and 212Pb) are significant gamma emitters in
decay chain dose calculations, their geochemical properties are less important in transport calcula-
tions owing to their exceptionally short half-lives. Even the 210Pb isotope has a relatively short
half-life of 22.2 years meaning that its sorptivity is of only limited relevance for geosphere transport
calculations. It is considered to be an important radionuclide, however, owing to its contribution to
the far-field dose rate as a daughter nuclide in the 238U decay chain.
Pb is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Pb(II) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. Similarly to Cd(II), the speciation of Pb(II) is strongly influenced by
chloride complexation and the complexes PbCl+, PbCl2, PbCl3–, PbCl42– are expected to be dominant
in saline groundwater. In fresh groundwater the carbonato-complexes (PbCO3, Pb(CO3)22–, PbHCO3+)
and, to a lesser extent, the hydroxo-complexes (PbOH+, PbOH2) tend to dominate. Under strongly
reducing conditions, the sulphide complexes Pb(HS)2 and Pb(HS)3– may be important although to
a lesser extent than for Cd sorption. The SKB-TDB only considers the selenite complex PbSeO3
on account of the fact that 210Pb has not previously been considered to be important in transport
calculations, although the specie may be of relevance for Se speciation inside a spent fuel canister.
The MinteqA2 database as distributed with PHREEQC was therefore used in speciation calculations
to form the basis for the above discussion.
There is very little data for Pb sorption on granitic rock owing to its lesser status as a safety critical
nuclide. The measurement data reported by /Papelis 2001/, however, have been used to give a very
rough estimate for Pb(II) sorption that is probably sufficient for the purposes of SR-Site. Since the
sorption of Pb(II) is expected to be dominated by an inner-sphere surface complexation mechanism for
the pH and ionic strength ranges of interest in groundwater, the estimate is assumed to be approximately
applicable for all groundwater compositions likely to be encountered. Owing to the limited data set used
to form the Kd recommendation, this is probably not a robust assumption. Also, given its relatively short
half-life, it is likely that 210Pb produced by decay of transported 226Ra in the near surface environment
dominates the flux of 210Pb to the biosphere. Since the hydrochemistry of the near surface environment is
much more variable than the repository environment, the Kd recommendation is therefore uncertain. The
transport of 210Pb in the near surface is also more likely to be affected by pseudocolloid transport.




82                                                                                                   R-10-48
A best estimate Kd value of 2.52×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.60±0.56). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution
be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (2.05×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (3.10×10–1 m3/kg).
Due to the uncertainties outlined above, a case could be made for the use of the geochemical analogue
Ni(II) as a sensitivity case study in place of the data ranges given for Pb(II). It is likely, however, that
the use of the Ni(II) analogue is over-cautious since Ni sorption appears to be more strongly influenced
by ionic strength. As also noted previously in Section 3.2.2, Pb2+ has a much larger first hydrolysis
constant than Ni2+ indicating relatively stronger inner-sphere sorption. A more detailed account of
the derivation of recommended Kd values for Pb(II) may be found in Appendix F.


5.2.7 Molybdenum (Mo)
The radioisotope 93Mo is an activation product of 92Mo found in the fuel rod alloy cladding and has
a half-life of roughly 4,000 years. The molybdate oxyanion, MoO42– is the only Mo species expected
to exist at normal groundwater pH levels, although protonated forms can exist at low pH. For the
purposes of safety assessment, the MoO42– ion can be reasonably assumed to be non-sorbing. A Kd
value of 0 m3/kg is therefore recommended for this species.


5.2.8 Neptunium (Np)
The main Np radioisotope of interest in SR-Site is 237Np which is mainly produced by decay
of 241Am (a daughter of 241Pu decay). The 237Np radioisotope has a half-life of 2.144×106 years.
Neptunium is redox sensitive and can exist in a number of oxidation states from Np(III) to Np(VII)
although only the Np(IV) and Np(V) redox states are relevant for normal groundwater compositions
and Eh ranges. In the tetravalent state, Np(OH)4 is the predominant specie in the pH interval 7–9,
although Np(OH)3CO3– and Np(OH)3+ play a minor role. In the pentavalent state, either the NpO2+
specie (referred to as neptunyl) or NpO2CO3– may be dominant depending on pH and carbonate
concentration with NpO2(CO3)23– typically in third place.
Quantification of Np sorption is complicated by its redox sensitivity and the fact that redox specia-
tion in the tetravalent or pentavalent forms is rarely confirmed rigorously. Sorption investigations are
usually performed under oxidising conditions at roughly atmospheric intensity or mildly reducing
conditions. Reducing conditions are usually achieved in batch experiments closed to the atmosphere
where the reducing intensity is determined by the balance between release of ferrous, Fe(II) ions
from the rock and the rate of oxidation by residual oxygen in the headspace of the glove box. The
oxidised pentavalent form is significantly more mobile than the reduced tetravalent form on account
of its higher solubility and weak sorptivity. Np sorption is thought to occur primarily by way of an
inner sphere surface complexation mechanism and therefore is relatively insensitive to groundwater
salinity although sensitive to pH and carbonate concentration.
Sorption of Np on rocks was quantified during the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations using
site specific materials and different groundwater compositions /Byegård et al. 2008, Selnert et al.
2009/. Although the experiments were performed in a nitrogen glove box atmosphere, the apparently
weak sorption of Np is indicative of Np(V) redox speciation although redox potential measurements
were not made to confirm the redox status of the contact solutions. Sorption of Np under both oxidis-
ing and reducing conditions are reported by /Huitti et al. 1996/ for Rapakivi granite using a natural
groundwater sample of marine type. Redox potentials measured during the anaerobic experiments
varied from about +70 mV to –70 mV with the lower redox potentials corresponding to longer con-
tact times. Although it is difficult to infer redox behaviour from measured electrode potentials, the
transition from predominantly Np(IV) to Np(V) speciation occurs at a relatively high redox potential
(roughly +100 mV) for the ranges of groundwater compositions used in the experiments.
Through-diffusion experiments involving Np(IV) are reported by /Yamaguchi et al. 2002/ for a 5 mm
thick granite coupon in a 1.0 M NaHCO3 solution (pH 8.8–9.0) under strongly reducing conditions
achieved through the addition of sodium dithionite, Na2S2O4. From interpretation of breakthrough
data, a Kd value of ~6×10–5 m3/kg was obtained. These experiments, however, were carried out with
a carbonate concentration at least three orders of magnitude higher than that expected for SR-Site
and therefore competition by dissolved carbonate is expected to have considerably reduced the


R-10-48                                                                                                   83
sorptivity of Np(IV). At such high carbonate concentrations, the Np(CO3)44– and Np(CO3)56– species
should dominate Np(IV) speciation. These complexed forms are not considered to contribute signifi-
cantly towards Np(IV) speciation under normal groundwater conditions and therefore the sorption
data are most likely not representative. Through-diffusion data for NpO2+ from an earlier study
performed under oxidising conditions are also described in /Yamaguchi et al. 2002/ for a possibly
more representative groundwater type. The Kd was calculated to be on the order of 4×10–6 m3/kg
which is somewhat lower than that estimated on the basis of the site investigation data and only just
higher than the free storage capacity of the rock matrix porosity.
From autoradiographic studies, Np(V) is known to sorb preferentially in association with biotite
/Kienzler et al. 2009/ in granitic rocks. It is possible that this is also accompanied by heterogeneous
reduction to the tetravalent form in the microenvironment of biotite mineral grains. This complicates
the interpretation of experimental data, however, since one could argue that this represents the
sorption (possibly surface precipitation) of Np(IV) rather than Np(V). Operationally, however, it is
assumed that sorption of Np(V) has been quantified and the unclear mechanism of Np(V) immobi-
lisation on biotite is neglected. Np(V) has also been shown to form ternary surface complexes with
carbonate /Arai et al. 2007/. This complicates predictions of the influence of dissolved carbonate
since increased carbonate can both promote sorption of ternary complexes and reduce sorption by
way of indirect competitive effects related to aqueous phase complexation.
Np sorption is thought to occur primarily by way of an inner sphere surface complexation mecha-
nism and therefore is relatively insensitive to groundwater salinity although sensitive to pH and
carbonate concentration. Since it is not currently possible to relate measured sorptivity to ground-
water pH and carbonate concentration in a reliable fashion, the empirical data ranges for different
groundwater compositions (redox considered separately) were pooled and the resulting distribution
of values assumed to represent an overall uncertainty arising due to groundwater compositional
variability and uncertainty. A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended Kd values for
both Np(IV) and Np(VI) may be found in Appendix G.
Under oxidising conditions, a best estimate Kd value of 4.13×10–4 m3/kg is recommended for Np(V)
sorption at Forsmark for all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be
lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –3.38±0.74). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that
the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (1.48×10–5 m3/kg) and 97.5%
percentiles (1.15×10–2 m3/kg).
Since sorption of Np appears to be related to biotite content, the higher CEC of Laxemar rock types
suggests that a correction needs to be made for transport calculations involving the Laxemar site.
The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended Kd range being
shifted upwards by roughly 0.3 log units. This corresponds to an approximate doubling of the Kd
value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.
Owing to the very small number of measurements reported for reducing conditions and underlying
quantification uncertainties, the Np(IV) sorption data are not considered to be sufficiently well-quali-
fied for extrapolation to SR-Site conditions. Recommended ranges of sorptivity for the Np(IV) redox
form are therefore made using Pu(IV) as a geochemical analogue since these data were considered to
be more reliable. It is noted, however, that the recommended Kd ranges based on the Pu(IV) analogy
are still in reasonable agreement with the actual Np(IV) data although these were not used in the
final recommendation.
Under reducing conditions, a best estimate Kd value of 5.29×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for Np(IV)
sorption at Forsmark for all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be
lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –1.28±0.65). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that
the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (2.84×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5%
percentiles (9.84×10–1 m3/kg).
Based on the groundwater hydrochemistry simulations described in /Salas et al. 2010/, the predicted redox
potential is thought to be sufficiently low that Np(IV) speciation can be generally assumed for geosphere
transport calculations in SR-Site. It is noted, however, that towards the end of the temperate time domain
(~9,000 y), the increasing carbonate concentration of the groundwater suggests that Np might be close to
the Np(IV)/Np(V) transition zone if the Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 pair is deemed to control redox conditions.



84                                                                                                R-10-48
5.2.9 Nickel (Ni)
The radioisotopes of nickel (59Ni and 63Ni) are activation products resulting from irradiation of the
metallic cladding of fuel elements. The 59Ni isotope has a half-life of 1.01×105 years and decays to
form stable 59Co. The 63Ni isotope has a half-life of 100 years and decays to form stable 63Cu. The
59
  Ni isotope is consequently considered a nuclide of importance for geosphere transport calculations,
whereas the 63Ni isotope is considered less important.
Ni is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Ni(II) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. In fresh groundwater the Ni2+ ion is expected to be the dominant
specie for dissolved nickel in the pH range 7–8, although generally shifting towards a predominance
of the carbonate complex, NiCO3 at pH greater than 8. Chloride complexation is important for this
element and the NiCl+ complex is frequently dominant in groundwater of more saline character.
Under strongly reducing conditions, the NiHS+ sulphide complex may also play an important role.
Ni sorption exhibits a weak sensitivity to ionic strength which might indicate an ion-exchange sorption
mechanism, although a mixed inner and outer-sphere surface complexation mechanism is also possible.
The magnitude of the first hydrolysis constant of the Ni2+ cation, on the other hand, suggests an inner
sphere sorption mechanism is likely. In the literature, surface complexation modelling approaches have
been frequently used to fit experimental data (e.g. /Bradbury and Baeyens 2005b, Olin et al. 2006/).
It therefore cannot be entirely ruled out that the apparent ionic sensitivity of Ni(II) sorption might be
related to hydrolysis effects since the contact groundwaters used in laboratory experiments typically
also exhibit pH levels approximately correlated with ionic strength. We have chosen to interpret the
empirical trend (operationally) as an ionic strength sensitivity, although it is noted that the systematic
trend is also compatible with a hydrolysis-based rationalisation with regard to the SR-Site groundwater
compositions as well as the contact groundwater end-members used in laboratory experiments.
Ni sorption was quantified during the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations using site specific
materials and several representative groundwater compositions /Byegård et al. 2008, Selnert et al.
2009/. Data are also reported by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/ for Olkiluoto tonalite and Rapakivi
granite in contact with native samples of saline and fresh groundwater, respectively. The site
investigation data were used to derive Kd values for SR-Site, while the Finnish data were used in a
supporting role as a consistency check on the recommended data.
In this compilation, the effect of ionic strength has been quantified by introducing a chemistry transfer
factor. The chemistry transfer factor was calculated using statistics of groundwater compositional
variability together with a least squares regression model based on the laboratory data obtained during
the site investigations. The data regression suggests that decreasing the ionic strength by an order of
magnitude results in a roughly 2.5 times proportional increase in the Kd value. The use of a regression
model also implies that if the sorptive variability is actually related to pH rather than ionic strength,
the approximate correlation of pH and ionic strength nevertheless captures the correct empirical trend.
The correction implied by the chemistry transfer factor is small relative to the overall uncertainty of
the Kd estimate for Ni(II) sorption and amounts to (on average) no more than a factor of about 1.4
shift of the best estimate Kd value for the range of salinities encountered during the temperate phase
relative to the least favourable groundwater composition at 3,000 y. Here, it should be noted that the
same caveats for the estimated impact of temporal variability of groundwater composition apply as
discussed previously for Cs(I) sorption. A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended
Kd values for Ni(II) may be found in Appendix H.
Since temporally variable Kd values cannot be modelled effectively in the current generation of
safety assessment codes, Kd values are recommended for the most saline conditions expected during
the repository groundwater evolution. A best estimate Kd value of 1.10×10–3 m3/kg is therefore
recommended for the Forsmark site for the most saline groundwater conditions expected at 3,000 y.
The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –2.96±0.65). For
stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space
between the 2.5% (5.97×10–5 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (2.04×10–2 m3/kg).
Although it has not been demonstrated that Ni(II) sorbs preferentially on biotite, the sensitivity to salinity
conditions suggests that scaling of the Kd value with respect to CEC is not an unreasonable assumption.
The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended Kd range being shifted
upwards by roughly 0.3 log units for calculations involving the Laxemar site. This corresponds to an
approximate doubling of the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.


R-10-48                                                                                                    85
5.2.10 Niobium (Nb)
The radioisotopes of niobium (94Nb and 93mNb) are activation products resulting from irradiation of
the metallic cladding of fuel elements. The 94Nb isotope has a half-life of 2.03×104 years and decays
to form stable 94Mo. The metastable 93mNb isotope has a half-life of 16.1 years and undergoes gamma
decay to form stable 93Nb. The 94Nb isotope is consequently considered a nuclide of importance for
geosphere transport calculations, whereas the 93mNb isotope is considered of only minor importance.
Nb is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Nb(V) valence is the only relevant redox state
for normal groundwater conditions. At circumneutral pH in both fresh and saline groundwater, the
NbO3– oxyanion and Nb(OH)5 hydroxo-complex are present in roughly equal proportion, although
the balance shifts slightly to a greater predominance of NbO3– at higher pH. Although an additional
Nb(OH)4– hydroxo-complex exists at very low concentration there are no other recognised species of
this element in the thermodynamic databases in common use.
Nb sorption data are reported by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/ for Olkiluoto tonalite and Rapakivi
granite in contact with native groundwater samples of saline and fresh character, respectively. Very
little difference in sorptivity is noted between the different groundwater compositions that could be
reasonably related to ionic strength. Based on the hydrolysis reaction of Nb, however, it is thought
that Nb should sorb principally by way of an inner sphere sorption mechanism. The empirical data
ranges for different groundwater compositions were therefore pooled and the resulting distribution
of values assumed to represent an overall uncertainty arising due to groundwater compositional
variability and uncertainty. A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended Kd values for
Nb(V) may be found in Appendix I.
A best estimate Kd value of 1.98×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.70±0.64). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty
distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (1.11×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles
(3.53×10–1 m3/kg).


5.2.11 Palladium (Pd)
The main palladium radioisotope of interest in SR-Site is 107Pd and is a fission product. It has a
relatively long half-life of 6.5×106 years and undergoes β-decay to form stable 107Ag. Pd is not
considered to be redox sensitive and the Pd(II) valence is the only relevant redox state for normal
groundwater conditions. At circumneutral to alkaline pH in fresh groundwater, the Pd(OH)2
hydroxo-complex is predominant. The Pd(OH)3– and PdOH+ complexes are also present, although at
much lower concentration. Under saline conditions, the PdCl 42– and, to a lesser extent, PdCl3– chloride
complexes dominate at pH 7 and below, although the balance shifts to a predominance of Pd(OH)2
and Pd(OH)3– above pH 8.
Pd sorption is poorly covered in the literature and only one study by /Tachi et al. 1999/ was found
for granite in contact with water of varying ionic strength (simple NaCl solution) and pH. Based on
the hydrolysis reaction of Pd2+ it is thought that Pd should sorb principally by way of an inner sphere
sorption mechanism. Sorption of Pd was not observed to be influenced by ionic strength in this study
which is as expected for the postulated sorption mechanism. The empirical data ranges for different
groundwater compositions were therefore pooled and the resulting distribution of values assumed to
represent an overall uncertainty arising due to groundwater compositional variability and uncertainty.
Owing to the small number of data points and the non-representative contact solution composition,
these data are considered uncertain although sufficiently well-qualified for the purposes of SR-Site.
A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended Kd values for Pd(II) may be found in
Appendix J.
A best estimate Kd value of 5.20×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.28±0.83). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribu-
tion be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (1.22×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (2.21 m3/kg).




86                                                                                               R-10-48
5.2.12 Plutonium (Pu)
The radioisotopes of plutonium are abundant in spent nuclear fuel and are present in the thorium (4n),
neptunium (4n+1), and actinium (4n+3) decay series. They generally form only as by-products of
neutron capture reactions and therefore do not occur in nature to any great extent with the exception
of primordial 244Pu which occurs in trace quantities. The isotopes of Pu in spent nuclear fuel and their
half-lives are; 238Pu (87.7 years), 239Pu (2.41×104 years), 240Pu (6.56×103 years), 241Pu (14.4 years),
and 242Pu (3.75×105 years). The 240Pu, 242Pu, and 239Pu radioisotopes are considered important nuclides
for geosphere transport calculations in SR-Site, while 241Pu and 238Pu are considered of only minor
importance.
Plutonium is redox sensitive and can exist as Pu(III), Pu(IV), Pu(V), and Pu(VI). Pu has relatively
complex redox chemistry since it is possible for several redox states to persist simultaneously (see
Appendix K). The different concentrations of carbonate present in fresh and saline groundwaters
have a considerable impact on the species distribution of Pu in its various redox states. A brief
overview of the main Pu species present in saline and fresh groundwater is given in Table 5-6.
Relatively detailed data sets for Pu sorption are reported by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala et al.
1998/ for various Finnish rock types in contact with native groundwater samples representative of
the sites from where the rock bore core samples were obtained. Similarly to the other actinides,
quantification of Pu sorption is complicated by its redox sensitivity and the fact that redox speciation
is usually not confirmed rigorously by spectroscopy or wet analytical methods. This is mainly because
such methods usually require much higher concentrations than are relevant for the characterisation of
sorption in environmental systems. In the case of Pu, however, the situation is particularly complex
since any pre-concentration or other treatment of the solution for analysis will also necessarily influ-
ence the relative concentrations of the different redox states. The propensity of Pu to undergo redox
disproportionatation reactions is also of great relevance since the relative fractions of different redox
states in solution may not be the same as that of sorbed Pu.
It is argued in Appendix K, by comparing first hydrolysis constants of Pu, that one would expect the
sorbed fraction to be predominantly in the Pu(IV) state even when other redox forms are present in
the aqueous phase. Similar reasoning for Pu(IV) redox speciation in the immobile phase is made by
/Choppin et al. 1997, Choppin 2003/ based on consideration of the strong hydrolysis of Pu(IV) and
low solubility product of Pu(OH)4. This observation, however, also begs the question as to whether
sorption of Pu is quantifiable at all given that it may not strictly be possible to describe it as a truly
adsorptive process. Moreover, the exceptionally strong hydrolysis of Pu(IV) is also what drives the
formation of polymeric eigencolloids which, depending on the phase separation technique used, might
result in over- or under-estimation of sorptivity in laboratory experiments where redox transforma-
tions are likely to occur.
Since there is no way of determining exactly what the distribution of redox species is under experimental
reducing conditions, it can only be assumed that the anoxic experimental conditions correspond to either
Pu(III) or Pu(IV) predominance or possibly a mixed Pu(III,IV) redox state. For oxidising conditions, on
the other hand, it is implicitly assumed that Pu(V) or Pu(VI) or a mixed Pu(V,VI) redox state exists. This
is acknowledged as being simplistic, however, in that there is a triple point near ambient environmental
conditions (~pH 8, ~Eh +600 mV) where equimolar concentrations of Pu(IV), Pu(V) and Pu(VI) is at
least thermodynamically possible.

Table 5-6. Principal aqueous complexed forms in order of importance for various Pu redox states
for saline (5×10–4 M HCO3) and fresh (4×10–3 M HCO3) groundwater compositions (pH 8). Only
species comprising at least 5% of the total concentration are shown and are listed in order of
importance.

          Saline                                      Fresh
                        +                                       –    +         3–
Pu(III)   PuOH2+, PuCO3 , Pu3+                        Pu(CO3)2 ,PuCO3 , Pu(CO3)3
Pu(IV)    Pu(OH)4                                     Pu(OH)4
              +         –                                       –   +
Pu(V)     PuO2 , PuO2CO3                              PuO2CO3 , PuO2
                                                      PuO2(CO3)2 , PuO2CO3, PuO2(CO3)3
                                                 2–             2–                   4–
Pu(VI)    PuO2CO3, PuO2(OH)2, PuO2OH+, PuO2(CO3)3




R-10-48                                                                                                87
As for the other redox sensitive elements, sorption investigations are usually performed under
oxidising conditions at roughly atmospheric intensity or under mildly reducing conditions. Reducing
conditions are usually achieved in batch experiments closed to the atmosphere where the reducing
intensity is determined by the balance between the reducing capacity of the contacting solution itself
together with the release of ferrous, Fe(II) ions from the rock and the rate of oxidation by residual
oxygen in the headspace of the glove box. In one of the abovementioned studies /Huitti et al. 1996/,
Tc was used to verify reducing conditions indirectly in a complementary set of experiments. The
use of Tc as a redox tracer is useful since it is easier to infer its redox state from the magnitude of its
sorptivity. Since oxidation of essentially insoluble Tc(IV) to the highly soluble Tc(VII) occurs at a
lower Eh than for the transition from Pu(III,IV) to Pu(V,VI) dominated redox speciation, this could
be taken as indicative of sufficiently reducing conditions to observe sorption of reduced Pu species.
Through-diffusion experiments involving Pu(IV) are reported by /Yamaguchi and Nakayama 1998/
for 5 mm thick granite coupons in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution (pH 9.3) under mildly reducing conditions.
From interpretation of breakthrough data, a Kd value of ~10–4 m3/kg was obtained. In a separate study
by /Yamaguchi et al. 2002/, through-diffusion of Pu was studied using the same method although under
much more strongly reducing conditions achieved by addition of sodium dithionite. In this case, a Kd
value of ~5×10–4 m3/kg was obtained. In both studies, predominance of the Pu(IV) redox state was
confirmed by a wet analytical method. These experiments, however, were carried out with a carbonate
concentration at least two orders of magnitude higher than that expected for SR-Site conditions and
are mostly of interest for studying the effective diffusivity of Pu(IV)-carbonate complexes rather than
quantifying sorption under realistic groundwater conditions.
Unlike the redox sensitive actinides Np and U, autoradiographic studies described by /Kienzler et al.
2009/ show no strong evidence for preferential sorption of Pu on Fe-containing minerals (such as
biotite) in granite. It is noted, however, that Pu was already in a tetravalent state in this study prior
to sorption and therefore may represent a different sorption mechanism to that of Np(V) and U(VI).
It should be noted, however, that the literature is not unequivocal regarding preferential sorption
on biotite and there are other studies that have noted such behaviour /e.g. Anderson et al. 2007/.
Although it is not clear in this case whether sorptivity should be correlated with biotite content or
not, the relatively high CEC of the Finnish rock types suggests that neglection of the CEC transfer
factor might be non-cautious. The data recommendation therefore assumes correlation of sorptivity
with CEC as for the other redox sensitive actinides.
The data given by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala et al. 1998/ for oxidising conditions are used as a
basis for the Kd recommendation for Pu(V,VI), while the data for reducing conditions are assumed to
be approximately representative of Pu(IV) sorption. For the Pu(III) redox state, geochemical analogy
with Am(III) is assumed. It is noted that the relative magnitude of the recommended data ranges are
in qualitative agreement with the expectation that sorption of Pu(IV) should be stronger than Pu(III)
by comparison of first hydrolysis constants. Pu sorption is thought to occur primarily by way of an
inner sphere surface complexation mechanism and therefore is relatively insensitive to groundwater
salinity although sensitive to pH and carbonate concentration. Since it is not currently possible to
relate measured sorptivity to groundwater pH and carbonate concentration in a reliable fashion, the
empirical data ranges for different groundwater compositions (redox considered separately) were
pooled and the resulting distribution of values assumed to represent an overall uncertainty arising
due to groundwater compositional variability and uncertainty. A more detailed account of the deriva-
tion of recommended Kd values for the various oxidation states of Pu may be found in Appendix K.
Under oxidising conditions, a best estimate Kd value of 9.14×10–3 m3/kg is recommended for Pu(V,VI)
sorption at Forsmark for all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be
lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –2.04±0.60). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that
the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (6.19×10–4 m3/kg) and 97.5%
percentiles (1.35×10–1 m3/kg).
For the Pu(III) redox state, a best estimate Kd value of 1.48×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for Forsmark
for all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.83±0.72). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution
be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (5.74×10–4 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (3.83×10–1 m3/kg).




88                                                                                                 R-10-48
A best estimate Kd value of 5.29×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for Pu(IV) sorption at Forsmark for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.28±0.65). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution
be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (2.84×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (9.84×10–1 m3/kg).
If it is assumed that the Kd for Pu sorption can be reasonably correlated with biotite content, the
higher CEC of Laxemar rock types suggests that a correction needs to be made for transport calcula-
tions involving the Laxemar site. The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the
recommended Kd range being shifted upwards by roughly 0.3 units in log space. This corresponds to
an approximate doubling of the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.
Based on the groundwater hydrochemistry simulations described in /Salas et al. 2010/, it is found
that the predicted redox potential should be sufficiently low that Pu(III) speciation can always be
assumed for geosphere transport calculations in SR-Site. Given that the redox speciation of sorbed
Pu might not correspond to that calculated for the aqueous phase, it could be argued that Pu(IV)
might be a more likely candidate for the predominant redox state under repository conditions. Since
Pu(III) is assigned a lower recommended Kd range, however, the assumption of Pu(III) redox specia-
tion appears to be a cautious choice for geosphere transport calculations.


5.2.13 Protactinium (Pa)
Radioisotopes of protactinium arise in the decay chains of 238U, 235U, and 237Np. The main radioisotope of
interest for geosphere transport, however, is the 231Pa daughter product of the 235U decay chain (daughter
of 239Pu) which has a half-life of 3,300 years. Although Pa can nominally exist in both tetravalent and
pentavalent form, only the pentavalent, Pa(V) redox state is considered relevant for normal groundwater
conditions. Pa is therefore considered to be largely redox insensitive. In both fresh and saline ground-
water, the electrically neutral PaO2OH complex dominates Pa(V) speciation although PaO2+ may also be
present at much lower concentration. Other aqueous complexes of Pa(V) are known, although they are
thought to be present at such low concentrations as to be negligible.
Relatively detailed data sets are reported by /Kulmala et al. 1996/ and /Huitti et al. 1996/ for sorption of
Pa on Finnish rock types in contact with native groundwater samples of varying composition (fresh and
saline) for both oxidising and weakly reducing conditions. No substantive difference in sorptivity was
noted between experiments made under oxic or anoxic conditions or for different groundwater compo-
sitions. Based on the hydrolysis reaction of Pa(V), it is thought that Pa(V) should sorb principally by
way of an inner sphere sorption mechanism and should therefore be insensitive to ionic strength effects.
The empirical data ranges for different groundwater compositions were therefore pooled and the
resulting distribution of values assumed to represent an overall uncertainty arising due to groundwater
compositional variability and uncertainty. A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended
Kd values for Pa(V) may be found in Appendix L.
A best estimate Kd value of 5.92×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.23±0.48). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution
be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (6.76×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (5.18×10–1 m3/kg).


5.2.14 Radium (Ra)
Radium isotopes are decay chain members for a number of actinides (238U, 235U, and 232Th). The four
principal isotopes of radium and their half-lives are 223Ra (11.43 d), 224Ra (3.66 d), 225Ra (14.9 d), and
226
    Ra (1,600 y). Since the first three isotopes have very short half-lives their sorptive properties are
typically not considered important in geosphere transport calculations although they are important
activity sources in their respective decay chains. Only the 226Ra radioisotope is considered important
for geosphere transport calculations in SR-Site.
Ra is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Ra(II) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. In typical saline groundwater, the Ra2+ cation is predominant although
the chloride complex RaCl+ may comprise up to 20% of the total Ra(II) concentration. In fresh water,
the sulphate complex RaSO4 may account for up to roughly 5% of the total Ra(II) concentration



R-10-48                                                                                                  89
whereas chloride complexation is negligible. Carbonate complexation and hydrolysis appears to play
only a very minor role in the aqueous phase speciation of Ra(II) and may be generally neglected.
Ra is expected to sorb by way of an ion-exchange mechanism and its sorption therefore exhibits
sensitivity to ionic strength. Measured activities of naturally occurring Ra(II) in groundwater are
frequently correlated with its geochemical analogue, Ba(II) which is often cited as evidence of a
solid solution solubility control involving the barite (BaSO4) end-member. This behaviour, however,
is also consistent with ion-exchange equilibria and it is difficult to draw specific conclusions purely
on the basis of correlations between groundwater constituents.
Groundwater concentrations of Ba at both Forsmark and Laxemar are approximately saturated, or
slightly oversaturated with respect to barite in pure phase form. Barite mineralisation in fracture
coatings, however, appears to be rare at both sites and thus far has only been identified as small
inclusions in galena (PbS) crystals /Sandström et al. 2008/. Naturally occurring Ra in groundwater
is positively correlated with both Ba and other major cations (most particularly Ca) although the
correlation is weak for Ba. This is discussed in more detail in Appendix A. The natural background
concentration of Ra determines the relevant concentration range for Ra sorption since that trans-
ported from the repository is not expected to exceed the natural background level. Consideration of
radiobarite solid solution is important for interpreting laboratory studies of sorption since groundwa-
ter compositions frequently exceed barite solubility limits. This can cast doubt on the magnitude of
measured sorption if a solid solution of radiobarite is likely to form spontaneously.
Ra sorption was quantified during the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations using site specific
materials and several representative groundwater compositions /Byegård et al. 2008, Selnert et al.
2009/. Data are also reported by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/ for various
granitic rock types from Finland in contact with native samples of saline and fresh groundwater. The
site investigation data were used to derive Kd values for SR-Site, while the Finnish data were used in
a supporting role as a consistency check on the recommended data. The groundwater compositions
used in obtaining the experimental data were also screened for barite solubility as a means of quality
control.
In this compilation, the effect of ionic strength has been quantified by introducing a chemistry
transfer factor to account for ion-exchange competition. The chemistry transfer factor was calculated
using statistics of groundwater compositional variability together with a simplified ion-exchange
model (see Section 5.1.1). Since ion-exchange selectivity constants were not available for Ra2+ a
geochemical analogy with Ba2+ was invoked. The correction implied by the chemistry transfer factor
is small relative to the overall uncertainty of the Kd estimate for Ra(II) sorption and amounts to (on
average) no more than a factor of about 2.4 shift of the best estimate Kd value for the range of salini-
ties encountered during the temperate phase relative to the least favourable groundwater composition
at 3,000 y. Here, it should be noted that the same caveats for the estimated impact of temporal vari-
ability of groundwater composition apply as discussed previously for Cs(I) sorption. A more detailed
account of the derivation of recommended Kd values for Ra(II) may be found in Appendix M.
Since temporally variable Kd values cannot be modelled effectively in the current generation of
safety assessment codes, Kd values are recommended for the most saline conditions expected during
the repository groundwater evolution. A best estimate Kd value of 2.42×10–4 m3/kg is therefore
recommended for the Forsmark site for the most saline groundwater conditions expected at 3,000 y.
The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –3.62±0.41). For
stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space
between the 2.5% (3.87×10–5 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (1.51×10–3 m3/kg). It is noted that the
absolute activities and relative activity ratios of naturally occurring 226Ra and 222Rn in groundwater
at the Forsmark site are approximately consistent with the magnitude of sorption implied by the Kd
range recommended for use in SR-Site (see Section 6.5).
The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended Kd range being
shifted upwards by roughly 0.3 log units for calculations involving the Laxemar site. This cor-
responds to an approximate doubling of the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality
with CEC.




90                                                                                              R-10-48
5.2.15 Selenium (Se)
The 79Se fission product is the principal radioisotope of Se of interest in SR-Site. The half-life of 79Se
has been subject to considerable uncertainty owing to its specific mode of beta decay, low activity,
and difficulty in obtaining a sufficiently uncontaminated sample that an accurate measurement can
be made. Different numerical values of the half-life of 79Se have been used in some historic safety
assessments. The current value used in SR-Site geosphere transport calculations is estimated at
3.77×105 years based on measurements reported by /Bienvenu et al. 2007/.
Se is redox sensitive and can exist in Se(–II), Se(0), Se(IV), and Se(VI) redox states. In the –II redox state
it exists primarily as the HSe– anion. In the tetravalent and hexavalent redox state, Se is predominantly
speciated in oxyanion form as HSeO3– and SeO42–, respectively. Se(IV), and Se(VI) can act as a complexing
ligand for a number of major groundwater cations and even other nuclides. Their concentrations, however,
are usually much lower than the primary species described above. The elemental form of Se(0) is not
expected to exist as an aqueous species although has been found to precipitate from solution in association
with pyrite, FeS2 /Breynaert et al. 2010/. This could potentially occur by way of a surface promoted
reduction of sorbed Se(IV) or Se(VI).
Se is expected to sorb relatively weakly since anions only bind to positively charged sorption sites. This
means that sorption will occur selectively on minerals that have a point of net zero proton charge close
to the groundwater pH. For the ranges of groundwater compositions likely in SR-Site this would indicate
a preference for sorption in association with ferric oxy-hydroxides and hematite microprecipitates in
the rock matrix as demonstrated by /Jan et al. 2007, 2008/. Although groundwater composition is not
expected to influence the distribution of complexed Se forms, competition for positive binding sites by
dissolved carbonate theoretically may reduce sorptivity. Elevated pH levels also imply reduced sorptivity
on account of lower abundance of positively charged surface sites above the point of zero charge.
It is difficult to predict the redox speciation of Se since multiple redox states frequently exist in ther-
modynamic disequilibrium /Beauwens et al. 2005/ and sorption studies may therefore represent mixed
redox states even in very carefully controlled experiments. It could be argued that under sufficiently
strong reducing conditions, hematite microprecipitates in the rock matrix could undergo reductive
dissolution and release sorbed Se. Under such conditions, however, one might equally well expect
solubility controlled transport of Se owing to precipitation of low solubility Se(-II) minerals (FeSe or
FeSe2) or possibly elemental Se(0).
Data for Se sorption on granite are reported by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ and /Papelis 2001/. Based on
extrapolation from these data sets, a best estimate Kd value of 2.95×10–4 m3/kg is recommended for
both the Forsmark and Laxemar sites for all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is
assumed to be lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –3.53±0.55). For stochastic simulations, it is recom-
mended that the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (2.5×10–5 m3/kg)
and 97.5% percentiles (3.48×10–3 m3/kg).
Although Se sorption could be reasonably assumed to be related to the biotite content of the rock
(being the main source of Fe(II)), the data are considered sufficiently uncertain that this is neglected
in the Kd recommendation. Owing to the large data uncertainties a case could also be made for the
assumption of non-sorbing status for Se by appealing to arguments of caution as is customary for the
other oxyanions. It is recommended that the impact of this uncertainty be therefore tested as a sensi-
tivity case study if deemed necessary. A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended Kd
values for the various redox states of Se may be found in Appendix N.

5.2.16 Silver (Ag)
The principal radioisotope of Ag is the 108mAg fission product which has a half-life of 418 years.
Owing to its short half-life this nuclide is not expected to contribute significantly to far field dose
rates under normal geosphere transport scenarios and is only likely to be important for accidental
intrusion cases where geosphere transport is bypassed.
Ag is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Ag(I) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. Ag(I) is strongly complexed by chloride in both fresh and saline
groundwaters to form AgCl and AgCl2 – whereas the free Ag+ cation typically comprises less than 10%
of the total Ag(I) concentration.


R-10-48                                                                                                    91
Calculations made using the MinteqA2 database suggest that the sulphide complexes AgHS,
Ag(HS)S42– and Ag(HS)2– may be important under strongly reducing conditions. Calculations made
using this database also predict a prominent role for Ag2Se under strongly reducing conditions. The
SKB-TDB does not consider these additional species and the chloride complexed forms are therefore
predicted to dominate for most groundwater compositions if this database is used in calculations.
Since 108mAg is not normally considered to be a safety critical nuclide there are no data sets available
for Ag sorption on granitic rock types. For this reason a geochemical analogy with Cs(I) has been
assumed in order to provide a recommended Kd range for this nuclide. The analogy is, however, not
ideal owing to the greater importance of chloride complexes in the case of Ag(I) and the fact that
sulphide complexes of Cs are not known to occur. The sorption of Ag(I) is thought to occur by way
of an ion-exchange mechanism and its sorptivity is therefore sensitive to ionic strength effects. As
noted previously in Section 3.2.2, the choice of Cs(I) as an analogue for Ag(I) is necessitated by a
lack of data for any of the alternative geochemical analogues.
Since temporally variable Kd values cannot be modelled effectively in the current generation of
safety assessment codes, Kd values are recommended for the most saline conditions expected during
the repository groundwater evolution. A best estimate Kd value of 3.49×10–4 m3/kg is therefore
recommended for the Forsmark site for the most saline groundwater conditions expected at 3,000 y.
The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –3.46±0.51). For
stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space
between the 2.5% (3.46×10–5 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (3.52×10–3 m3/kg).
The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended Kd range being shifted
upwards by roughly 0.3 log units for calculations involving the Laxemar site. This corresponds to an
approximate doubling of the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.


5.2.17 Strontium (Sr)
The principal radioisotope of Sr is the 90Sr fission product which has a half-life of 28.7 years. Owing
to its short half-life, its activity decays to trivial levels after about a thousand years. Strontium
therefore has only minor significance for far-field transport calculations in SR-Site.
Sr is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Sr(II) valence is the only relevant redox state for normal
groundwater conditions. In saline groundwater, the Sr2+ cation is predominant with the sulphate complex
SrSO4 being the next most important specie although typically comprising on the order of 1% of the total
Sr(II) concentration. In fresh water, Sr2+ is also dominant with the carbonate complex SrCO3 or SrHCO3+
accounting for about 3–5% of the total concentration depending on pH.
The sorption of Sr is relatively well studied on account of its importance for historical radiological
incidents and geochemical similarity to Ca which is key to its radiological hazard. Sr(II) is expected
to sorb by way of an ion-exchange mechanism and therefore exhibits sensitivity to ionic strength.
Owing to its geochemical similarity to Ca, sorption of Sr is very weak. Sr(II) sorption was quantified
during the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations using site specific materials and several repre-
sentative groundwater compositions /Byegård et al. 2008, Selnert et al. 2009/. The site investigation
data were used to derive Kd values for SR-Site although for the more saline groundwater composi-
tions, sorption was sufficiently weak as to be unquantifiable.
In this compilation, the effect of ionic strength has been quantified by introducing a chemistry transfer
factor to account for ion-exchange competition. The chemistry transfer factor was calculated using
statistics of groundwater compositional variability together with a simplified ion-exchange model (see
Section 5.1.1). The correction implied by the chemistry transfer factor is small relative to the overall
uncertainty of the Kd estimate for Sr(II) sorption and amounts to (on average) no more than a factor
of about 1.14 shift of the best estimate Kd value for the range of salinities encountered during the
temperate phase relative to the least favourable groundwater composition at 3,000 y. Here, it should
be noted that the same caveats for the estimated impact of temporal variability of groundwater compo-
sition apply as discussed previously for Cs(I) sorption. A more detailed account of the derivation of
recommended Kd values for Sr(II) may be found in Appendix P.




92                                                                                                   R-10-48
Since temporally variable Kd values cannot be modelled effectively in the current generation of
safety assessment codes, Kd values are recommended for the most saline conditions expected during
the repository groundwater evolution. A best estimate Kd value of 3.42×10–6 m3/kg is therefore
recommended for the Forsmark site for the most saline groundwater conditions expected at 3,000 y.
The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –5.47±0.99). For
stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space
between the 2.5% (3.84×10–8 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (3.05×10–4 m3/kg). It is noted that the
storage capacity for Sr sorbed in the rock matrix is only slightly higher than that dissolved in the
porewater itself meaning that uncertainty in the lower quantitative bound of the Kd distribution is
largely irrelevant for geosphere transport calculations.
The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended Kd range being shifted
upwards by roughly 0.3 log units for calculations involving the Laxemar site. This corresponds to an
approximate doubling of the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.


5.2.18 Technetium (Tc)
The principal radioisotope of Tc is 99Tc which has a half-life of 2.11×105 years. Tc is redox sensitive
and can exist as Tc(IV) or Tc(VII) in groundwater. In the tetravalent state, the TcO(OH)2 complex
is the predominant specie, although TcO(OH)3– and Tc (OH)3CO3– play a minor role depending on
pH and carbonate concentration. In the oxidised Tc(VII) state, the pertechnate oxyanion, TcO4– is
the overwhelmingly dominant aqueous specie for all reasonable groundwater compositions.
Quantification of Tc sorption is complicated by its redox sensitivity although very weak sorption is
usually considered evidence of the +VII (oxidised) redox state. For the purposes of safety assess-
ment, the TcO–4 ion can be reasonably assumed to be non-sorbing. A Kd value of 0 m3/kg is therefore
recommended for the Tc(VII) redox state. Under reducing conditions, Tc(IV) sorption is thought
to occur primarily by way of an inner sphere surface complexation mechanism and therefore is
considered to be relatively insensitive to groundwater salinity.
Data reported by /Huitti et al. 1996/ suggest very strong sorption of Tc(IV), although owing to the
very small number of measurements and underlying quantification uncertainties, the data are not
considered to be sufficiently well-qualified for extrapolation to SR-Site conditions. Recommended
ranges of sorptivity for the Tc(IV) redox state are therefore made using Pu(IV) as a geochemical
analogue since these data were considered to be more reliable. It is noted, however, that the recom-
mended Kd ranges based on the Pu(IV) analogy are still in reasonable agreement with the actual
Tc(IV) data although these were not used in the final recommendation. A more detailed account of
the derivation of recommended Kd values for Tc(IV) may be found in Appendix Q.
Under reducing conditions, a best estimate Kd value of 5.29×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for Tc(IV)
sorption at Forsmark for all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be
lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –1.28±0.65). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that
the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (2.84×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5%
percentiles (9.84×10–1 m3/kg).
Since sorption of Tc appears to be related to biotite content /Kienzler et al. 2009/, the higher CEC of
Laxemar rock types suggests that a correction needs to be made for transport calculations involving
the Laxemar site. The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended
Kd range being shifted upwards by roughly 0.3 log units. This corresponds to an approximate
doubling of the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.
Based on the groundwater hydrochemistry simulations described in /Salas et al. 2010/, the predicted
redox potential is thought to be sufficiently low that Tc(IV) speciation can be assumed for geosphere
transport calculations in SR-Site. Towards the end of the temperate time domain (~9,000 y),
however, the increasing carbonate concentration of the groundwater suggests that Tc might be close
to the Tc(IV)/Tc(VII) transition zone if the Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 pair is deemed to control redox conditions.




R-10-48                                                                                              93
5.2.19 Thorium (Th)
The radioisotopes of thorium are produced by the decay of long-lived actinides and their activities
increase with time in spent nuclear fuel by in-growth (i.e. from decay of their actinide parents).
The isotopes of thorium and their half-lives are 227Th (18.68 days), 228Th (1.9116 years), 229Th
(7.34×103 years), 230Th (7.538×104 years), 231Th (25.52 hours), and 234Th (24.10 days). Only the 230Th
and 229Th radioisotopes are considered important for geosphere transport calculations in SR-Site on
account of their relatively long half-lives.
Th is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Th(IV) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. The speciation of Th in both fresh and saline groundwater is mostly
dominated by the Th(OH)3CO3– hydroxo-carbonato complex although the Th(OH)4 complex plays
an increasingly important role at pH ≥ 8 in groundwater with low dissolved carbonate concentration.
Thorium is generally considered to be largely immobile in natural systems; an assumption implicitly
underlying its use in uranium disequilibrium studies.
Th is difficult to study experimentally owing to its strong hydrolysis and ability to form eigencol-
loids in aqueous solutions. Th(IV) sorption was studied in the site investigations although measure-
ment problems meant that sorption proved impractical to quantify using the batch method employed.
There are some older sorption studies in the literature although these do not appear to be sufficiently
well-qualified to be used defensibly in SR-Site using the present methodology. Through-diffusion
experiments are reported by /Park and Baik 2009/ on a granite coupon of unspecified thickness
in a 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution (pH 9.5). These experiments are appealing in that one would not
expect colloidal Th(IV) material to be transported through the rock to any great extent. Based on
the magnitude of apparent diffusivity reported, a Kd value of about 4×10–2 m3/kg seems realistic. It
should be noted, however, that the carbonate concentration used in these experiments is at least two
orders of magnitude higher than the highest concentration expected during SR-Site and therefore the
extrapolated Kd value may not be representative.
Interestingly, in that particular study the anionic tracer Cl– was found to diffuse faster than tritiated
water, which is the opposite of what one would expect in the presence of anion exclusion in confined
pore spaces. This could be explained, however, if the coupon was sufficiently thin that macropores
crossed the full width of the sample since diffusion would occur relatively unhindered in such pores
while the storage capacity of the sample microporosity might be less accessible to anions. For the
interpretation of the Th(IV) through-diffusion experiment this is relevant for two reasons; 1) for the
assignment of an appropriate formation factor for diffusion given Th(IV) should be predominantly
speciated as the Th(OH)3CO3– anion and, 2) because the initially fast transport through the macropo-
res might underestimate the storage capacity of the rock over longer timescales since access to the
microporosity is not hindered for the neutral Th(OH)4 species.
Since the literature data for Th sorption are uncertain and possibly influenced by non adsorptive inter-
actions, recommended Kd ranges for Th(IV) are made using Pu(IV) as a geochemical analogue since
these data may be more reliable. There is no evidence to suggest that Th(IV) should sorb preferentially
in association with biotite and therefore this has not been considered in the present recommenda-
tion. Th(IV) sorption is thought to occur primarily by way of an inner sphere surface complexation
mechanism and therefore is relatively insensitive to groundwater salinity although sensitive to pH and
carbonate concentration.
A best estimate Kd value of 5.29×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.28±0.65). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution
be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (2.84×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (9.84×10–1 m3/kg).
It should be noted that this range brackets the value estimated by interpretation of the through-diffusion
experiments reported by /Park and Baik 2009/ and therefore appears to be defensible.


5.2.20 Tin (Sn)
The two principal radioisotopes of tin, 126Sn and 121mSn are produced as fission products and have
half-lives of 2.3×105 years and 43.9 years, respectively. Consequently, only the 126Sn radioisotope
is of importance for geosphere transport calculations in SR-Site. Sn is redox sensitive and can exist



94                                                                                                R-10-48
in a divalent, Sn(II) and tetravalent, Sn(IV) form. The Sn(IV) redox form, however, is dominant for
all reasonable groundwater compositions and the Sn(II) redox state can usually be neglected. The
hydroxo-complexes, Sn(OH)4, Sn(OH)5–, and Sn(OH)62– are the dominant species in both fresh and
saline groundwater. The Sn(OH)4 specie tends to dominate at circumneutral pH, although Sn(OH)5–
and Sn(OH)62– take on greater prominence at pH 8 and above.
Sorption data for Sn(IV) are sparse in the literature on account of its relatively strong sorptivity
and because it is not normally considered to be a safety critical nuclide. Some data are reported by
/Ticknor et al. 1996/ and these have been used as a basis for the Kd recommendation in this data
compilation. Sn(IV) is not expected to exhibit preferential sorption on biotite and therefore this has
not been considered in the present recommendation. Sn(IV) sorption is thought to occur primarily
by way of an inner sphere surface complexation mechanism and therefore is relatively insensitive to
groundwater salinity although sensitive to pH. A more detailed account of the derivation of recom-
mended Kd values for Sn(IV) may be found in Appendix O.
A best estimate Kd value of 1.59×10–1 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –0.80±0.28). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution
be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (4.51×10–2 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (5.58×10–1 m3/kg).


5.2.21 Tritium (3H)
Tritium (3H) with a half-life of 12.3 years is produced as both a fission product and as an activation
product. Owing to its short half-life it decays to trivial levels after about a thousand years. Tritium
therefore has very little significance for far-field transport calculations in SR-Site.
Although tritiated water molecules (3H1HO and 3H2O) can disassociate and participate in protona-
tion/deprotonation reactions with surface groups on mineral surfaces, the concentration of water
molecules is so large in comparison that sorption is, for all practical purposes, non-existent in a
safety assessment perspective. Tritium can therefore be reasonably assumed to be non-sorbing. A Kd
value of 0 m3/kg is therefore recommended for this species.


5.2.22 Uranium (U)
The radioisotopes of uranium are the most abundant radionuclides in spent nuclear fuel as well as
being ubiquitous in granitic rock as naturally occurring substances. The isotopes of uranium and their
half-lives are; 232U (68.9 years), 233U (1.592×105 years), 234U (2.455×105 years), 235U (7.04×108 years),
236
   U (2.342×107 years), 237U (6.75 days), and 238U (4.468×109 years). The 234U, 235U, and 238U radio-
isotopes are present in both natural and enriched uranium as well as being initially present in spent
fuel. The other U radioisotopes generally do not occur in nature. The 233U, 234U, 235U, 236U and 238U
radioisotopes are all considered important nuclides for geosphere transport calculations in SR-Site.
Uranium is one of the most well studied actinides partly because of its importance for nuclear waste
safety and partly owing to its ubiquitous presence in environmental systems. Its particular redox
chemistry also allows it to be used as a marker of geochemical alteration processes in uranium dis-
equilibrium studies. Uranium is redox sensitive and can exist in a number of different oxidation states
from +III to +VI, although only the +IV (uranous) and +VI (uranyl) states are usually considered
sufficiently stable to occur in groundwater. U(V) also readily undergoes redox disproportionation
to form U(IV) and U(VI) in groundwater which also makes it less relevant for safety assessment
calculations. Although the U(V) state is ordinarily disregarded, speciation calculations made using the
SKB-TDB suggest that a non-negligible fraction of U(V), on the order of a few percent, does appear
to thermodynamically possible in under reducing conditions in SR-Site groundwaters at pH 7–8.
In the tetravalent state, U(OH)4 is the overwhelmingly dominant specie in the pH interval 7–9 for
all reasonable groundwater compositions. In the pentavalent state, only UO2+ is recognised in the
SKB-TDB as the basis species for U(V). For the hexavalent state and in fresh groundwater, the
carbonato-complex UO2 (CO3)34– and, to a lesser extent, UO2 (CO3)22– are dominant with UO2CO3
being of only minor significance. In saline groundwater, the UO2 (CO3)22–, and UO2(CO3)34– species
are still predominant although UO2 (OH)3–, UO2 (OH)2, UO2CO3, and UO2OH+ may also be important
depending on the pH and carbonate concentration.


R-10-48                                                                                                95
As for the other redox sensitive actinides, quantification of U sorption is complicated by its redox
sensitivity and the fact that redox speciation in the tetravalent or hexavalent forms is rarely confirmed
rigorously by spectroscopic or wet analytical methods. Sorption investigations are usually performed
under oxidising conditions at roughly atmospheric intensity or mildly reducing conditions. Reducing
conditions are usually achieved in batch experiments closed to the atmosphere where the reducing
intensity is determined by the reducing capacity of the contact solution and the balance between release
of ferrous, Fe(II) ions from the rock and the rate of oxidation by residual oxygen in the headspace of
the glove box. This, however, is rarely sufficient to guarantee U(IV) redox speciation and the addition
of a strong reducing agent such as sodium dithionite is usually required for this. Most of the studies in
the open literature are for U(VI) since this is the most relevant redox state for terrestrial environmental
conditions. The oxidised hexavalent form is significantly more mobile than the reduced tetravalent
form on account of its higher solubility and weak sorptivity. U sorption is thought to occur primarily
by way of an inner sphere surface complexation mechanism and therefore is relatively insensitive to
groundwater salinity although sensitive to pH and carbonate concentration.
Sorption of U on rocks was quantified during the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations using site
specific materials and different groundwater compositions /Byegård et al. 2008, Selnert et al. 2009/. Even
though the experiments were performed in a nitrogen glove box atmosphere, the apparently weak sorption
of U is indicative of U(VI) redox speciation. Redox potential measurements, however, were not made to
confirm the redox status of the contact solutions so this is speculative. Sorption of U under oxidising con-
ditions are also reported by /Huitti et al. 1996/ for Rapakivi granite using a natural groundwater sample of
marine type. Although there are some other sorption studies in the literature for U(IV), these do not appear
to be sufficiently well-qualified to be used defensibly in SR-Site using the present methodology.
Through-diffusion experiments involving U(VI) are reported by /Yamaguchi and Nakayama 1998/ for
5 mm thick granite coupons in 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution (pH 9.3) under oxidising conditions. From
interpretation of breakthrough data, a Kd value of ~10–4 m3/kg was obtained. These experiments,
however, were carried out with a carbonate concentration at least two orders of magnitude higher than
that expected for SR-Site conditions and are mostly of interest for studying the effective diffusivity of
uranyl-carbonate complexes rather than sorption under realistic groundwater conditions.
From autoradiographic studies, U(VI) is known to sorb preferentially in association with biotite in granitic
rocks /Kienzler et al. 2009/ and is possibly accompanied by heterogeneous reduction to the tetravalent
form. As outlined previously for Np, this complicates the interpretation of experimental data since one
could argue that this represents the sorption (possibly surface precipitation) of U(IV) rather than U(VI).
Operationally, however, it is assumed that sorption of U(VI) has been quantified and the unclear mecha-
nism of U(VI) immobilisation on biotite is neglected. U(VI) has also been shown to form ternary surface
complexes with carbonate /Bargar et al. 1999/. This complicates predictions of the influence of dissolved
carbonate since increased carbonate can both promote sorption of ternary complexes and reduce sorption
by way of indirect competitive effects related to aqueous phase complexation.
The site specific data from Forsmark and Laxemar together with the data set from /Huitti et al. 1996/
have been used to make Kd recommendations in SR-Site for U(VI). Since it is not currently possible
to relate measured sorptivity to groundwater pH and carbonate concentration in a reliable fashion,
the empirical data ranges for different groundwater compositions (redox considered separately) were
pooled and the resulting distribution of values assumed to represent an overall uncertainty arising
due to groundwater compositional variability and uncertainty. A more detailed account of the deriva-
tion of recommended Kd values for U(VI) may be found in Appendix R.
Under oxidising conditions, a best estimate Kd value of 1.06×10–4 m3/kg is recommended for U(VI)
sorption at Forsmark for all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be
lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –3.97±0.66). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that
the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (5.53×10–6 m3/kg) and 97.5%
percentiles (2.05×10–3 m3/kg).
Since sorption of U appears to be related to biotite content, the higher CEC of Laxemar rock types
suggests that a correction needs to be made for transport calculations involving the Laxemar site.
The higher CEC of Laxemar site-specific rock types results in the recommended Kd range being
shifted upwards by roughly 0.3 units in log space. This corresponds to an approximate doubling of
the Kd value under the assumption of linear proportionality with CEC.


96                                                                                                  R-10-48
Owing to the lack of data for reducing conditions recommended Kd ranges for U(IV) are made
using Pu(IV) as a geochemical analogue. Under reducing conditions, a best estimate Kd value of
5.29×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for U(IV) sorption at Forsmark for all groundwater compositions.
The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed (log10 Kd = –1.28±0.65). For
stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty distribution be sampled in log space
between the 2.5% (2.84×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles (9.84×10–1 m3/kg).
Based on the groundwater hydrochemistry simulations described in /Salas et al. 2010/, it is found
that the predicted redox potential is not sufficiently low that U(IV) speciation can always be assumed
for geosphere transport calculations in SR-Site. Towards the end of the temperate time domain
(~9,000 y), the increasing carbonate concentration of the groundwater suggests that U is most likely
in a hexavalent state if the Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 pair is deemed to be controlling redox conditions. Even
at early times while carbonate concentrations are still relatively low, hexavalent redox speciation
cannot be ruled out. Interestingly, redox speciation as U(IV) is not necessarily a less pessimistic
scenario since it constitutes a more concentrated secondary source of the 226Ra daughter (mostly
from the decay of 234U). Owing to these uncertainties, it is therefore recommended that case studies
considering both redox states (separately) are propagated in SR-Site geosphere transport calcula-
tions.


5.2.23 Zirconium (Zr)
The principal radioisotope of Zr is the 93Zr activation product which has a half-life of 1.53×106 years.
Zr is not considered to be redox sensitive and the Zr(IV) valence is the only relevant redox state for
normal groundwater conditions. The Zr(OH)4 hydroxo-complex is the overwhelmingly dominant
species for all groundwater compositions likely to be encountered in SR-Site.
Sorption data for Zr(IV) are sparse in the literature on account of its relatively strong sorptivity and
since it is not normally considered to be a safety critical nuclide. The data reported by /Kulmala and
Hakanen 1993/ have been used as a basis for the Kd recommendation in this compilation. Zr(IV) is
not expected to exhibit preferential sorption on biotite and therefore this has not been considered in
the present recommendation. A more detailed account of the derivation of recommended Kd values
for Zr(IV) may be found in Appendix S.
A best estimate Kd value of 2.13×10–2 m3/kg is recommended for both Forsmark and Laxemar for
all groundwater compositions. The uncertainty distribution is assumed to be lognormally distributed
(log10 Kd = –1.67±0.35). For stochastic simulations, it is recommended that the uncertainty
distribution be sampled in log space between the 2.5% (4.48×10–3 m3/kg) and 97.5% percentiles
(1.02×10–1 m3/kg).




R-10-48                                                                                               97
6         Summary of recommended data for use in SR-Site

Based on the data extrapolation and qualification procedures described in Chapter 5, Kd data have
been estimated for application conditions in SR-Site. The data are based on the use of Forsmark
metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) as a reference rock type and consider the impact of all known
sources of uncertainty that can be reasonably quantified. For the impact of temporally variable
groundwater compositions, Kd values have been chosen cautiously (wherever feasible to do so) to
reflect the least favourable conditions for transport retardation.
For calculations involving the Laxemar site, the data have been rescaled taking into consideration only
the difference in cation exchange capacity (CEC) of site specific rock at the Laxemar site relative to the
Forsmark site. Transfer factors for surface area and groundwater compositional effects are assumed to
be identical for both sites owing to broad similarities in hydrochemical and microstructural features of
each site. Based on the relative Fe-content of the dominant Forsmark and Laxemar rock types (used as
a proxy for CEC), this implies that the arithmetic data ranges are simply increased by a factor of 1.6 to
give the appropriate data range for Laxemar. This correction is also only made for those radionuclides
where sorption is deemed to be related to the CEC of the rock.
Data for surface complexing radionuclides may be assumed to be applicable for all projected ground-
water compositions as the specified uncertainty distributions implicitly include uncertainty arising due
to groundwater compositional variation (as far as this can be reasonably assessed). The dominant redox
species for those radionuclides that are known to exhibit redox sensitivity are established on the basis
of speciation simulations made using PHREEQC in conjunction with the SKB-TDB thermodynamic
database /Duro et al. 2006/. Specific details are discussed in the appendices to this report on a case by
case basis for each radionuclide. Owing to uncertainty concerning the actual redox status of uranium
under projected repository conditions, it is recommended that both the tetravalent, U(IV) and hexava-
lent, U(VI) cases are propagated within the safety assessment calculations as separate case studies.
For radionuclides that sorb by an ion-exchange or predominantly outer-sphere surface complexation
mechanism, ionic strength is expected to have a relatively strong theoretical impact on sorptivity.
Increased ionic strength typically results in a decrease of Kd for these solutes owing to sorption
competition with other groundwater constituents. Cautiously scaled Kd values for these solutes are
therefore given for the most saline conditions expected during repository evolution. The scaling fac-
tors for Cs, Sr, and Ra are derived from simulations made using PHREEQC and a single-site model
of ion exchange in combination with projected statistics of ionic strength conditions in the repository
volume. This is discussed on a case by case basis in the report appendices for each element concerned.
In the case of Ni, a statistical regression model is used which relates variations in apparent sorptivity
with ionic strength. As noted previously in Section 5.2.9, an apparent sensitivity to ionic strength does
not necessarily imply a strictly ion-exchange sorption mechanism and a mixed inner- and outer-sphere
surface complexation mechanism is also possible as are other explanatory mechanisms. Where apparent
sorption sensitivity to ionic strength is observed, the additional assumption of a CEC dependency gener-
ally gives lower extrapolated Kd values than neglect of CEC effects and therefore this may be considered
a cautious assumption. This is also true for solutes which, although not sensitive to ionic strength, are
suspected to sorb preferentially in association with CEC determining minerals such as biotite.
Periodic episodes of deep saline upconing or cryogenic brine formation associated with high flow
conditions are not expected to occur for any significant length of time and therefore have been
neglected in the recommendation of Kd values for SR-Site. Although ionic strength is known to have
a strong impact on the sorption of ion-exchanging solutes, the overall range of data uncertainty is
sufficiently large that the ionic strength correction factors are relatively small.
It must also be remembered that since the changes in groundwater composition are not resolved on the
level of individual migration paths, extrapolation to the groundwater situations existing at different times
must consider the statistical distribution of spatially variable groundwater compositions throughout the
entire repository volume which, in itself, introduces additional statistical dispersion in the calculation of
Kd uncertainty ranges. Since the Kd data are recommended for relatively saline conditions, this means that
the strength of sorption will be pessimistically underestimated during the bulk of repository evolution.


R-10-48                                                                                                   99
Given the uncertainty of the underlying data set for lead and its possible contribution to far-field
dose rates, it is also recommended that Kd values for Ni(II) are used as an analogue for Pb(II) sorp-
tion in sensitivity case studies. This might be considered an over-pessimistic assumption, however,
given that Pb(II) is expected to sorb much more strongly than Ni(II) as predicted by comparison of
first hydrolysis reaction constants (see Section 3.2.2).
The data are given in the form of lognormal distributions which implicitly include the combined
impact of uncertainty as well as spatial and temporal variability. The median of the log-transformed
Kd uncertainty distribution may be taken to be the best estimate value for central case deterministic
calculations. Although flow path averaging effects would normally prescribe the use of the arithme-
tic mean Kd value, the use of the median is deemed a more cautious choice given that uncertainty
(rather than variability) is expected to make the dominant contribution to the statistical dispersion of
the recommended Kd data ranges.



6.1           Recommended Kd data for Forsmark
Sorption data recommended for use in SR-Site simulations of the Forsmark site are summarised in
Table 6-1. The Kd data are given in the form of lognormal distributions characterised by a mean (µ)
and standard deviation (σ). For stochastic simulations, it is suggested that the lognormal distribu-
tions are sampled uniformly between the upper and lower limits defined by the 2.5% and 97.5%
percentiles specified as the lower and upper Kd limits in the table. The best estimate Kd value for use
in deterministic calculations is given as the median of the Kd distribution.

Table 6-1. Recommended sorption partitioning coefficient, Kd values for use in SR-Site simulations of
the Forsmark site. The predominant species for redox sensitive elements are highlighted in bold text.
Values are given for the best estimate (median), parameters for the lognormal distribution (m and s),
as well as lower and upper limits corresponding to the 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles, respectively.

Radionuclide      Best estimate    log10Kd – m      log10Kd – s       Lower Kd limit   Upper Kd limit
(Redox State)     Kd (m3/kg)                                          (m3/kg)          (m3/kg)

Ac(III)           1.48·10–2        –1.83            0.72              5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
Ag(I)             3.49·10–4        –3.46            0.51              3.46·10–5        3.52·10–3
Am(III)           1.48·10   –2
                                   –1.83            0.72              5.74·10   –4
                                                                                       3.83·10–1
C, HCO3   –
                  0.0              –                –                 0.0              0.0
C, CH4            0.0              –                –                 0.0              0.0
C, -CO2H          0.0              –                –                 0.0              0.0
Cd(II)            1.10·10–3        –2.96            0.65              5.97·10–5        2.04·10–2
Cl(-I)            0.0              –                –                 0.0              0.0
Cm(III)           1.48·10–2        –1.83            0.72              5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
Cs(I)             3.49·10   –4
                                   –3.46            0.51              3.46·10   –5
                                                                                       3.52·10–3
Eu(III)           1.48·10   –2
                                   –1.83            0.72              5.74·10   –4
                                                                                       3.83·10–1
H(I)              0.0              –                –                 0.0              0.0
Ho(III)           1.48·10–2        –1.83            0.72              5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
I(-I)             0.0              –                –                 0.0              0.0
Mo(VI)            0.0              –                –                 0.0              0.0
Nb(V)             1.98·10–2        –1.70            0.64              1.11·10–3        3.53·10–1
Ni(II)            1.10·10   –3
                                   –2.96            0.65              5.97·10   –5
                                                                                       2.04·10–2
Np(IV)            5.29·10   –2
                                   –1.28            0.65              2.84·10   –3
                                                                                       9.84·10–1
Np(V)             4.13·10   –4
                                   –3.38            0.74              1.48·10   –5
                                                                                       1.15·10–2
Pa(IV)            5.92·10   –2
                                   –1.23            0.48              6.76·10   –3
                                                                                       5.18·10–1
Pa(V)             5.92·10   –2
                                   –1.23            0.48              6.76·10   –3
                                                                                       5.18·10–1
Pb(II)            2.52·10   –2
                                   –1.60            0.56              2.05·10   –3
                                                                                       3.10·10–1
Pd(II)            5.20·10   –2
                                   –1.28            0.83              1.22·10   –3
                                                                                       2.21
Pu(III)           1.48·10–2        –1.83            0.72              5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
Pu(IV)            5.29·10   –2
                                   –1.28            0.65              2.84·10   –3
                                                                                       9.84·10–1
Pu(V)             9.14·10   –3
                                   –2.04            0.60              6.19·10   –4
                                                                                       1.35·10–1
Pu(VI)            9.14·10   –3
                                   –2.04            0.60              6.19·10   –4
                                                                                       1.35·10–1



100                                                                                                R-10-48
Radionuclide      Best estimate   log10Kd – m      log10Kd – s      Lower Kd limit   Upper Kd limit
(Redox State)     Kd (m3/kg)                                        (m3/kg)          (m3/kg)

Ra(II)            2.42·10–4       –3.62            0.41             3.87·10–5        1.51·10–3
S(-II)            0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
Se(-II)           2.95·10–4       –3.53            0.55             2.50·10–5        3.48·10–3
Se(IV)            2.95·10   –4
                                  –3.53            0.55             2.50·10   –5
                                                                                     3.48·10–3
Se(VI)            2.95·10   –4
                                  –3.53            0.55             2.50·10   –5
                                                                                     3.48·10–3
Sm(III)           1.48·10   –2
                                  –1.83            0.72             5.74·10   –4
                                                                                     3.83·10–1
Sn(IV)            1.59·10   –1
                                  –0.80            0.28             4.51·10   –2
                                                                                     5.58·10–1
Sr(II)            3.42·10   –6
                                  –5.47            0.99             3.84·10   –8
                                                                                     3.05·10–4
Tc(IV)            5.29·10   –2
                                  –1.28            0.65             2.84·10   –3
                                                                                     9.84·10–1
Tc(VII)           0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
Th(IV)            5.29·10–2       –1.28            0.65             2.84·10–3        9.84·10–1
U(IV)             5.29·10–2       –1.28            0.65             2.84·10–3        9.84·10–1
U(VI)             1.06·10–4       –3.97            0.66             5.53·10–6        2.05·10–3
Zr(IV)            2.13·10–2       –1.67            0.35             4.48·10–3        1.02·10–1




6.2           Recommended Kd data for Laxemar
Sorption data recommended for use in SR-Site simulations of the Laxemar site are summarised in
Table 6-2 and are given in the same format as Table 6-1. The data are adjusted to reflect the higher
CEC of the Laxemar site-specific rock types relative to Forsmark. Corrections are only made for
those elements where sorption is deemed to be related to CEC (or biotite content) and where such data
has been documented in the underlying data sets upon which the recommendations are made. This
encompasses the solutes that are deemed to exhibit sorptive sensitivity to ionic strength; Ag, Cd, Cs,
Ni, Ra, and Sr. Corrections are also made for Np, Pu, Tc, and U on account of their redox sensitivity
and observations of preferential sorption in association with biotite as documented in the literature.

Table 6-2. Recommended sorption partitioning coefficient, Kd values for use in SR-Site for the
Laxemar site. The predominant species for redox sensitive elements are highlighted in bold text.
Values are given for the best estimate (median), parameters for the lognormal distribution (µ and
σ), as well as lower and upper limits corresponding to the 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles, respectively.

Radionuclide      Best estimate   log10Kd – m      log10Kd – s      Lower Kd limit   Upper Kd limit
(Redox State)     Kd (m3/kg)                                        (m3/kg)          (m3/kg)

Ac(III)           1.48·10–2       –1.83            0.72             5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
Ag(I)             6.54·10–4       –3.18            0.51             6.49·10–5        6.60·10–3
Am(III)           1.48·10   –2
                                  –1.83            0.72             5.74·10   –4
                                                                                     3.83·10–1
C, HCO3   –
                  0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
C, CH4            0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
C, -CO2H          0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
Cd(II)            2.07·10–3       –2.68            0.65             1.12·10–4        3.83·10–2
Cl(-I)            0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
Cm(III)           1.48·10–2       –1.83            0.72             5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
Cs(I)             6.54·10–4       –3.18            0.51             6.49·10–5        6.60·10–3
Eu(III)           1.48·10–2       –1.83            0.72             5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
H(I)              0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
Ho(III)           1.48·10–2       –1.83            0.72             5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
I(-I)             0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
Mo(VI)            0.0             –                –                0.0              0.0
Nb(V)             1.98·10–2       –1.70            0.64             1.11·10–3        3.53·10–1
Ni(II)            2.07·10   –3
                                  –2.68            0.65             1.12·10   –4
                                                                                     3.83·10–2
Np(IV)            9.92·10   –2
                                  –1.00            0.65             5.33·10   –3
                                                                                     1.85
Np(V)             7.75·10–4       –3.11            0.74             2.78·10–5        2.16·10–2
Pa(IV)            5.92·10   –2
                                  –1.23            0.48             6.76·10   –3
                                                                                     5.18·10–1



R-10-48                                                                                               101
Radionuclide     Best estimate     log10Kd – m       log10Kd – s       Lower Kd limit   Upper Kd limit
(Redox State)    Kd (m3/kg)                                            (m3/kg)          (m3/kg)

Pa(V)            5.92·10–2         –1.23             0.48              6.76·10–3        5.18·10–1
Pb(II)           2.52·10   –2
                                   –1.60             0.56              2.05·10   –3
                                                                                        3.10·10–1
Pd(II)           5.20·10   –2
                                   –1.28             0.83              1.22·10   –3
                                                                                        2.21
Pu(III)          2.78·10–2         –1.56             0.72              1.08·10–3        7.19·10–1
Pu(IV)           9.92·10   –2
                                   –1.00             0.65              5.33·10   –3
                                                                                        1.85
Pu(V)            1.71·10–2         –1.77             0.60              1.16·10–3        2.53·10–1
Pu(VI)           1.71·10   –2
                                   –1.77             0.60              1.16·10   –3
                                                                                        2.53·10–1
Ra(II)           4.53·10   –4
                                   –3.34             0.41              7.26·10   –5
                                                                                        2.83·10–3
S(-II)           0.0               –                 –                 0.0              0.0
Se(-II)          2.95·10–4         –3.53             0.55              2.50·10–5        3.48·10–3
Se(IV)           2.95·10–4         –3.53             0.55              2.50·10–5        3.48·10–3
Se(VI)           2.95·10–4         –3.53             0.55              2.50·10–5        3.48·10–3
Sm(III)          1.48·10–2         –1.83             0.72              5.74·10–4        3.83·10–1
Sn(IV)           1.59·10–1         –0.80             0.28              4.51·10–2        5.58·10–1
Sr(II)           6.42·10–6         –5.19             0.99              7.21·10–8        5.71·10–4
Tc(IV)           9.92·10–2         –1.00             0.65              5.33·10–3        1.85
Tc(VII)          0.0               –                 –                 0.0              0.0
Th(IV)           5.29·10–2         –1.28             0.65              2.84·10–3        9.84·10–1
U(IV)            9.92·10–2         –1.00             0.65              5.33·10–3        1.85
U(VI)            2.00·10–4         –3.70             0.66              1.04·10–5        3.84·10–3
Zr(IV)           2.13·10   –2
                                   –1.67             0.35              4.48·10   –3
                                                                                        1.02·10–1




6.3       Comparison with the previous data compilation
A selection of the recommended data are shown in Figure 6-1 as box and whisker plots together with
data previously used in SR-Can /SKB 2006/ for comparative purposes. Similar plots depicting the
recommended data for trivalent actinides and lanthanides are given in Figure 6-2 (noting that the
trivalent actinides and lanthanides are assumed to have identical sorption properties in the present
data compilation).
In the box and whisker plots of the SR-Site data, the coloured portion of the box plot represents the
25%–75% interquartile range with the median given as the horizontal dividing line. Whiskers of the
box plot represent the 2-sided 95% confidence interval of the data range. The whiskers for the SR-Can
data are based on the notional upper and lower limits of the data as defined in /Crawford et al. 2006/ and
do not necessarily correspond to a 95% confidence interval. For solutes not reported with a 25%–75%
interquartile range in SR-Can, an approximate estimate of half the overall data range is assumed.
In most cases the SR-Site recommended Kd data ranges are somewhat less than those used previously
in SR-Can with the exception of Sn(IV) and Pd(II) which are given higher ranges than that previously
recommended. Recommended data ranges for these elements in SR-Can were taken directly from the
corresponding recommendation in SR-97 /Carbol and Engkvist 1997/.
In /Carbol and Engkvist 1997/, Pd(II) is assumed to have similar sorptivity to Ni(II) and is therefore
parameterised with a lower Kd range. The recommendation in SR-Site, on the other hand, is based
on actual measurements with Pd(II) as reported by /Tachi et al. 1999/. The significantly higher first
hydrolysis constant for Pd(II) relative to Ni(II) suggests that the previously used analogy, although
cautious is less good and substantially stronger sorption is predicted in line with the literature data
used in the present compilation.
Ra(II) is assigned a significantly lower Kd value in this compilation than in the previous SR-Can
compilation. The previous recommendation, however, may have been biased by the use of data for
groundwater compositions prone to radiobarite co-precipitation (as pointed out by /Stenhouse et al.
2008/). The current recommendation is predominantly based on the detailed data obtained from site
specific rocks from Forsmark and Laxemar which are considered to be well qualified data sets and
have been screened for the possibility of radiobarite co-precipitation.


102                                                                                                 R-10-48
Sn(IV) was previously given a low Kd range in /Carbol and Engkvist 1997/ owing to uncertainty
concerning the redox state of this element as Sn(II,IV) and a concern that anionic chloride complexes
may dominate its speciation in groundwater. In the current compilation, the reduced tetravalent
form is considered to be most likely and chloride complexation is not expected to be important. The
SR-Site recommendation is based on data reported by /Ticknor and McMurray 1996/ and is thought
to be reasonable given that Sn(IV) has the highest first hydrolysis constant of all tetravalent solutes
considered in this compilation which is indicative of relatively strong sorption.
Lead, Pb(II) has not been considered in previous data compilations and it therefore appears for the
first time in SR-Site. As noted previously, the literature data set which underlies the Kd recommenda-
tion for Pb(II) is thought to be possibly less reliable and the use of the Ni(II) analogue is therefore
proposed for sensitivity case studies even though this may be over-pessimistic.
Other elements and redox states are given approximately similar or lower Kd ranges for SR-Site based
on the new data extrapolation procedures adopted in this report. In many cases, the uncertainty range
is expanded in SR-Site relative to that used in previous recommendations. In some instances this is
due to a substantially larger database of values. In other cases this is due to a more formal propagation
of error estimates in the extrapolation procedure although this applies mostly to solutes where the lit-
erature data are considered to be associated with significant uncertainties due to low sample numbers.
A particular uncertainty in the SR-Site data compilation concerns the assumption of Pu(IV) as an
analogue for the sorption of other tetravalent radionuclides. In previous compilations, Th(IV) has
been used as an analogue owing to its insensitivity to redox conditions. The older literature data
from which Th(IV) Kd recommendations were previously made in SR-Can, although reasonable,
are considered by the present author to be less reliable on account of their high-end range and the
possibility that undocumented surface precipitation or eigencolloid formation may have biased the


                   2




                   1




                   0




                   -1




log10 Kd (m3/kg)
                   -2




                   -3




                   -4




                   -5




                   -6




                   -7




                   -8
                        Ra(II)   Ni(II)   Sr(II)   Cs(I) Am(III) U(IV)   U(VI) Pu(III) Np(IV) Pa(V) Tc(IV) Se(-II) Nb(V) Th(IV) Sn(IV) Zr(IV)   Ag(I)   Cd(II) Pd(II)   Pb(II)

                                                                                                   Species

Figure 6‑1. Recommended Kd ranges (log10-scale) for SR‑Site calculations concerning the Forsmark site
(green box and whisker plots). Data previously recommended for use in SR‑Can are shown for comparative
purposes (purple box and whisker plots). A lower effective bound on relevant Kd values is provided by the
storage porosity of the rock matrix which is shown as the horizontal unbroken reference line along with the
2-sided 95% confidence interval of the estimate (broken lines).


R-10-48                                                                                                                                                                          103
                   2




                   1




                   0




                   -1




log10 Kd (m3/kg)
                   -2




                   -3




                   -4




                   -5




                   -6




                   -7




                   -8
                        Ac(III)   Am(III)   Cm(III)    Eu(III)       Ho(III)       Pu(III)       Sm(III)

                                                      Species

Figure 6‑2. Recommended Kd ranges (log10-scale) for SR‑Site calculations concerning the Forsmark site
(green box and whisker plots). Data previously recommended for use in SR‑Can are shown for comparative
purposes (purple box and whisker plots). A lower effective bound on relevant Kd values is provided by the
storage porosity of the rock matrix which is shown as the horizontal unbroken reference line along with the
2-sided 95% confidence interval of the estimate (broken lines).


results. This is considered particularly likely for the tetravalent radionuclides on account of their
strong hydrolysis. Furthermore, relevant BET surface area data and other experimental conditions
were not recorded in the older references which renders difficult, any extrapolation to in situ condi-
tions according to the quantification procedures adopted in this report.
The data reported by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala et al. 1998/ for Pu sorption under reducing
conditions are considered to be qualified data sources on account of their detailed documentation
of experimental procedures and conditions. Although multiple redox states of Pu can theoretically
be present at the measured redox potentials documented in the references, it is thought that the
measured sorptivity can be assumed to be approximately representative of Pu(IV) sorption.
The reasoning for this follows the discussion concerning redox states in Section 2.1.4 where it is postu­
lated that any difference in sorptivity of two co-existing redox states would necessarily result in a readjust-
ment of the redox species distribution between the aqueous and surface sorbed phases thus favouring the
predominance of the more strongly sorbing redox state (assuming thermodynamic reversibility).
On the basis of the LFER methodology outlined in Section 3.2.1, sorption of the Pu(IV) redox state
should be favoured over Pu(III) owing to its stronger hydrolysis. In any case, the LFER principle
suggests that the Kd for Pu(IV) should be at least as high as that for Pu(III) and by analogy, the other
trivalent lanthanides and actinides. Given that the tetravalent radionuclides are assigned Kd values
that are only slightly higher than the corresponding values for Am(III)/Eu(III), this seems to be
consistent with the data. It is therefore the opinion of the present author that the literature data for Pu
sorption under reducing conditions, although not ideal, appear to constitute the most reliable source
of sorption data for the tetravalent radionuclides of importance.


104                                                                                                        R-10-48
6.4       Comparison with data from the LTDE-SD project
As part of the geoscientific programme carried out at the Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory (HRL), a series
of tracer experiments were performed with the aim of characterising diffusive uptake of various sorbing
and non-sorbing radionuclides to the rock matrix under more realistic conditions than the experiments
involving crushed materials typically used in laboratory investigations of sorption. The LTDE-SD
(Long Term Diffusion Experiment – Sorption and Diffusion) experiment was therefore conceived to
study the coupled processes of sorption and matrix diffusion while minimising confounding advective
and hydrodynamic dispersion effects.
The in situ experiment consisted of a tracer test involving diffusive uptake to a confined rock stub at the
so-called niche section in the Äspö HRL at an elevation of approximately –410 m (relative to sea level)
/Nilsson et al. 2010, Widestrand et al. 2010a/. In addition to the in situ tracer test, independent laboratory
studies were undertaken using core samples taken from the tracer test site as well as core samples
obtained from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation areas /Widestrand et al. 2010b/. The labora-
tory investigations consisted of in-diffusion experiments performed on monolithic bore core samples
as well as sorption measurements on crushed materials using the same methods employed previously
in the site investigations. The results of the evaluation of the in-diffusion experiments documented by
/Widestrand et al. 2010b/ are used here to compare with the data recommended for use in SR-Site.
Although this compilation deals exclusively with sorption data, it is important to recognise that
Kd data are used in conjunction with effective diffusivity data when applied in safety assessment
calculations. As outlined in Section 2.3.1, it is the material properties group, NMPG defined in
Equation 2-44 that can be shown to uniquely determine the residence time distribution of a
transported radionuclide for the model of solute retardation used in SR-Site. More specifically, the
retarded travel time for a given recovery fraction of a released solute pulse is proportional to the
square of this number (equal to the product of effective diffusivity and volumetric storage capacity,
DeK). The case of a rock matrix with reduced sorptivity and increased effective diffusivity should
therefore be indistinguishable from the case of increased sorptivity and decreased effective diffusiv-
ity, provided the magnitude of the DeK product (or NMPG) is preserved. This is a logical consequence
of the solution given by /Neretnieks 1980/ as well as the analogous problem in heat conduction
described by /Carslaw and Jaeger 1959/. In a practical sense, and provided the effective penetration
depth associated with radionuclide transport is less than the maximum matrix depth assumed in
modelling, any discrepancy between the true material properties (as described by De and Kd) and the
values used in modelling is immaterial as long as DeK (or NMPG) is the same in both cases.
Although the depth dependent profiles of tracer concentrations in the rock matrix are significantly
influenced by the individual values of effective diffusivity and Kd, it is only the lumped parameter
group that describes the changes in concentration in the aqueous phase and consequently, the overall
rate of diffusive uptake to the rock matrix. For this reason, when making comparisons between
tracer tests and data recommended for use in safety assessment calculations, it is more appropriate to
compare differences in the DeK product rather than the absolute values of De and Kd in isolation.
In /Widestrand et al. 2010b/, estimates are made of De and Kd by least squares fitting of a diffusive
uptake model to the time dependent aqueous phase concentration curve where one of the parameters
is held constant at a value determined by independent measurement. In general, the procedure of
fitting one or the other parameter gives results that are not exactly the same as the values obtained by
independent testing. The data evaluations do, however, confirm that the DeK product is the same in
both cases.
Figure 6-3 shows a cross plot of DeK values calculated using the recommended data for SR-Site with
corresponding values estimated for the in-diffusion experiments described in /Widestrand et al. 2010b/.
The SR-Site recommended value for the storage porosity, θm of the rock matrix under in situ stress
conditions at Forsmark and Laxemar is given as 1.8×10–3 (0.18%) while the recommended effective
diffusivity is given as a lognormal distribution with the following characteristics /SKB 2010b/:
log10 De ≈ –13.7±0.25       (cations)
log10 De ≈ –14.2±0.25       (anions)




R-10-48                                                                                                   105
                1.0E-05


                1.0E-06                                                              Cd(II)/Ni(II)


                                               Co(II)/Ni(II)               Ni(II)
                1.0E-07


                                             Cs(I)                                                   U(IV)
                1.0E-08


                1.0E-09




DeK (LTDE-SD)
                                        Ba(II)/Ra(II)
                1.0E-10                                                                                    U(IV)



                1.0E-11                                                                                              Co(II)/Ni(II)
                               Cs(I)
                                                                                                           Co(II)/Ni(II)
                1.0E-12
                                       Ba(II)/Ra(II)
                                                                                           Cd(II)/Ni(II)
                                            Ba(II)/Ra(II)
                1.0E-13
                                                                                    Cd(II)/Ni(II)

                1.0E-14                                                                                                    Äspö
                                                                   Cs(I)
                                                                                                                       Laxemar
                1.0E-15
                                                                                                                       Forsmark

                1.0E-16

                     1.0E-16    1.0E-15          1.0E-14       1.0E-13          1.0E-12         1.0E-11              1.0E-10         1.0E-09

                                                                DeK (SR-Site)

 Figure 6‑3. Cross plot of the effective diffusivity and volumetric storage capacity product, DeK (m2/s)
 estimated using SR-Site recommended values and independent data obtained in the LTDE-SD experiment
 for monolithic samples of Äspö, Laxemar, and Forsmark site specific rocks /Widestrand et al. 2010b/.
 Markers indicate median values and error bars represent 2σ uncertainty limits. For plotting the horizontal
 ordinate, geochemical analogy with Ni(II) is assumed for both Co(II) and Cd(II), while Ra(II) is used as an
 analogue for Ba(II). The sloping broken line indicates the equivalence trend line for reference purposes.


 Since the recommended effective diffusivity range is assumed to be dominated by uncertainty rather
 than spatial variability, the best estimate De is taken to be the median value (i.e. 2×10–14 m2/s for
 cations, 6.3×10–15 m2/s for anions). In all cases, cationic status was assumed for diffusing solutes on
 the basis of their predicted speciation (see Table 3-2) for the contact water compositions specified
 in /Widestrand et al. 2010b/. On account of the relatively high uranium Kd values reported, U(IV)
 speciation is assumed. It is acknowledged, however, that this is a poorly supported assumption and the
 actual redox state is uncertain. In the comparison with SR-Site recommended data, Äspö rock (Ävrö
 granodiorite) is assumed to have roughly the same material properties as the Laxemar rock types.
 By and large, the SR-Site recommended data give DeK values lower than that estimated for the
 LTDE-SD experiment involving intact core samples, although the associated uncertainty ranges
 are large for both. With the possible exception of the Ba(II) tracer uptake on the Laxemar rock, the
 SR-Site recommended data would appear to cautiously under-predict radionuclide travel times by
 about 2–3 orders of magnitude, all other things being equal. The close correspondence between the
 LTDE-SD data estimates obtained for Ni(II), Co(II), and Cd(II) tracers also lend some support to
 the geochemical analogies invoked in the SR-Site data compilation (at least for the groundwater
 composition used in LTDE-SD). On the basis of these results it could therefore be argued that the
 data recommended for use in SR-Site are cautious relative to independently obtained estimates under
 more realistic mass transfer conditions.



 106                                                                                                                                   R-10-48
6.5       Partial validation using natural tracer data
During the site investigations at Forsmark and Laxemar, activities of dissolved 222Rn and 226Ra were
measured in the investigation boreholes. In addition to this, a large number of measurements were
also made to characterise abundances of natural U-series nuclides sorbed or otherwise immobilised
on fracture coatings /Sandström et al. 2008/. Together with the known uranium content of the rock
as compiled by /Sandström and Stephens 2009/ for the Forsmark site, it is possible to estimate the
relative rate of production of 226Ra within the rock matrix and in fracture coatings provided secular
equilibrium of the U-series decay chain can be assumed deep within the rock matrix. Based on this
information it is possible to conclude that the overwhelming proportion of 226Ra found in Forsmark
groundwater originates from decay processes in the rock matrix and it is not produced in any
significant quantity in the fracture filling minerals themselves.
Since most of the 226Ra appears to originate in the rock matrix it is useful to compare 222Rn and 226Ra
simultaneously since their absolute and relative activities encode a significant amount of information
concerning the geochemical behaviour of the rock matrix and its interaction with groundwater. For
this purpose, stochastic simulations were made using a modified version of the transport model
described by /Neretnieks 2002/ and uncertainty distributions estimated for all parameters and vari-
ables that are known to influence the transport of naturally occurring 222Rn and 226Ra in situ. For vari-
ables that were poorly constrained (i.e. decay recoil capture efficiency, transport aperture, fracture
coating thickness, instantaneous retardation in fracture coatings), broad log-uniform distributions
were assumed covering the entire range of expected variation (see Appendix B for details).
The results of these simulations are shown in Figure 6-4 where the data are presented as a probability
density for an ensemble of 105 realisations. The probability density is represented as a smoothed 2D
histogram with 100 equally spaced bins along the principle axes of the figure. The expected 222Rn
and 226Ra activities based on best estimate values of model parameters are indicated by red circular
markers for different radium Kd case studies (with and without additional transport retardation in
fracture coatings). The red curve shows the locus of expected variation for the best estimate 222Rn
and 226Ra activities in response to altered Kd for radium. Measurement data from Forsmark boreholes
are plotted as blue circular markers with shading proportional to the background Ca2+ concentration.
Error bars are not shown on account their size being typically smaller than the plot markers used to
represent the data on a log-log scale. The relative errors of the measurements are, however, roughly
4–6% based on radiometric counting statistics.
As noted in Appendix B, 226Ra activity exhibits a strong correlation with Ca2+ concentration which
is possibly indicative of reduced ion-exchange sorption in more saline groundwaters. It is noted that
the measurement data plotted in the lower left-hand quadrant of Figure 6-4 correspond to shallow
sampling locations with low Ca2+ concentrations. The prediction of greater sorptivity for samples
exhibiting simultaneously low 222Rn and 226Ra activities is therefore qualitatively consistent with the
measurement data as plotted in the figure.
As can be seen from Figure 6-4, the probability distribution of expected 222Rn and 226Ra activities
agrees relatively well with the measurement data when the SR-Site recommended Kd distribution
for radium is used in the simulations. In a probabilistic sense, the expected activity ranges for both
222
    Rn and 226Ra appear to be neither overestimated nor underestimated by a significant margin
when considering all other sources of uncertainty. On the basis of this analysis, and assuming that
the uncertainties of other governing variables are reasonably assessed, we therefore conclude that
the SR-Site recommended Kd data for radium are both reasonable and defensible for use in safety
assessment calculations.




R-10-48                                                                                              107
            Strong sorption (Rf ≈ 100) in fracture coating                                     10-5 m3/kg




                                                                             10-4 m3/kg



                                                                  10-3.62 m3/kg




                                                     10-3 m3/kg
                                                                                   SR-Site best estimate

                                    10 m /kg
                                       -2   3



            10 m /kg
               -1   3




                                                                                          No sorption in fracture coating




Figure 6‑4. Expected activity distributions of 222Rn and 226Ra activities plotted together with measurement
data from Forsmark boreholes. The simulation data are presented as a probability density with darker
shading indicating the most likely activity ranges (105 realisations) in the simulation ensemble. The red
curve designates the locus of best estimate activities for the specified Kd values (red markers). The SR-Site
best estimate is indicated in yellow shading. The measurement data points (blue circular markers) are
shaded according to background Ca2+ concentration with lighter shading indicating lower concentration.




108                                                                                                                     R-10-48
7         References
SKB’s (Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB) publications can be found at www.skb.se/publications.


Ahrland S, Chatt J, Davies N R, 1958. The relative affinities of ligand atoms for acceptor
molecules and ions. Quarterly Reviews, Chemical Society, 12, pp 265–276.
Akiba K, Hashimoto H, Kanno T, 1989. Distribution coefficient of cesium and cation exchange
capacity of minerals and rocks. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology, 26, pp 1130–1135.
Alexander W, Smith P, McKinley I, 2003. Modelling radionuclide transport in the geological
environment: a case study from the field of radioactive waste disposal. In: Scott E M (ed). Modelling
radioactivity in the environment. Amsterdam: Elsevier. (Radioactivity in the Environment 4),
pp 109–146.
Alkhamis K A, Wurster D E, 2002. Prediction of adsorption from multicomponent solutions by
activated carbon using single-solute parameters. Part II – Proposed equation. AAPS PharmSciTech, 3,
pp 53–60.
Allard B, Rydberg J, Kipatsi H, Torstenfelt B, 1979. Disposal of radioactive waste in granitic
bedrock. In: Fried S (ed). Radioactive waste in geologic storage: based on a symposium sponsored
by the Division of nuclear chemistry and technology at the 176th meeting of the American chemical
society, Miami Beach, Florida, 11–15 September 1978. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
(ACS Symposium Series 100), pp 47–73.
Allard B, Torstenfelt B, Andersson K, 1981. Sorption studies of H14CO3 on some geologic media
and concrete. In: Scientific basis for nuclear waste management: proceedings of the International
symposium on the scientific basis for nuclear waste management held in Boston, Massachusetts,
17–20 November 1980. New York: Plenum Press. (Scientific Basis for Nuclear Waste Management
3), pp 465–472.
Allard B, Karlsson M, Tullborg E-L, Larson S Å, 1983. Ion exchange capacities and surface areas
of some major components and fracture filling materials of igneous rocks. SKBF/KBS TR 83-64,
Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Allard B, Ittner T, Torstenfelt B, 1985. Migration of trace elements into water-exposed natural
fissure surfaces of granitic rock. Chemical Geology, 49, pp 31–42.
Anderson E B, Rogozin Y M, Smirnova E A, Bryzgalova R V, Andreeva N R, Malimonova S I,
Shabalev S I, Fujiwara A, Tochiyama O, 2007. Sorption-barrier properties of granitoids and
andesite-basaltic metavolcanites with respect to Am(III) and Pu(IV): 1. Absorption of Am and
Pu from groundwater on monolithic samples of granitoids and andesite-basaltic metavolcanites.
Radiochemistry, 49, pp 305–312.
André M, Malmström M E, Neretnieks I, 2008a. Determination of sorption properties of intact
rock samples: New methods based on electromigration. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 103,
pp 71–81.
André M, Neretnieks I, Malmström M E, 2008b. Measuring sorption coefficients and BET surface
areas on intact drillcore and crushed granite samples. Radiochimica Acta, 96, pp 673–677.
André M, Malmström M E, Neretnieks I, 2009. Specific surface area determinations on intact
drillcores and evaluation of extrapolation methods for rock matrix surfaces. Journal of Contaminant
Hydrology, 110, pp 1–8.
Andrews J N, Hussain N, Batchelor A S, Kwakwa K, 1986. 222Rn solution by the circulating fluids
in a “hot dry rock” geothermal reservoir. Applied Geochemistry, 1, pp 647–657.
Andrews J N, Ford D J, Hussain N, Trivedi D, Youngman M J, 1989. Natural radioelement
solution by circulating groundwaters in the Stripa granite. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 53,
pp 1791–1802.
Appel J, 1973. Freundlich’s adsorption isotherm. Surface Science, 39, pp 237–244.




R-10-48                                                                                           109
Appelo C A J, Postma D, 1999. A consistent model for surface complexation on birnessite (–MnO2)
and its application to a column experiment. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 63, pp 3039–3048.
Appelo C A J, Postma D, 2005. Geochemistry, groundwater and pollution. 2nd ed. Leiden: Balkema.
Appelo C A J, Van Der Weiden M J J, Tournassat C, Charlet L, 2002. Surface complexation of
ferrous iron and carbonate on ferrihydrite and the mobilization of arsenic. Environmental Science &
Technology, 36, pp 3096–3103.
Arai Y, Moran P B, Honeyman B D, Davis J A, 2007. In situ spectroscopic evidence for
neptunium(V)-carbonate inner-sphere and outer-sphere ternary surface complexes on hematite
surfaces. Environmental Science & Technology, 41, pp 3940–3944.
Audi G, Bersillon O, Blachot J, Wapstra A H, 2003. The evaluation of nuclear and decay properties.
Nuclear Physics A, 729, pp 3–128.
Baeyens B, Bradbury M H, 2004. Cation exchange capacity measurements on illite using the
sodium and cesium isotope dilution technique: effects of the index cation, electrolyte concentration
and competition: modeling. Clays and Clay Minerals, 52, pp 421–431.
Bargar J R, Reitmeyer R, Davis J A, 1999. Spectroscopic confirmation of uranium(VI)-carbonato
adsorption complexes on hematite. Environmental Science & Technology, 33, pp 2481–2484.
Baston G M N, Berry J A, Brownsword M, Heath T G, Tweed C J, Williams S J, 1995. Sorption
of plutonium and americium on repository, backfill and geological materials relevant to the JNFL
low-level radioactive waste repository at Rokkasho-Mura. In: Murakami T, Ewing R C (eds).
Scientific basis for nuclear waste management XVIII: symposium held in Kyoto, Japan, 23–27
October 1994. Pittsburgh, PA: Materials Research Society. (Materials Research Society Symposium
Proceedings 353), pp 957–964.
Baston G M N, Berry J A, Brownsword T G, Heathe T G, Ilet D J, McCrohan R, Tweed C J,
Yui M, 1999. The sorption of polonium, actinium and protactinium onto geological materials. In:
Wronkiewicz D J, Lee J H (eds). Scientific basis for nuclear waste management XXII: symposium
held in Boston, Massachusetts, 30 November – 4 December 1998. Warrendale, PA: Materials
Research Society. (Materials Research Society Symposium Proceedings 556), pp 1107–1114.
Beall G W, O’Kelley G D, Allard B, 1980. An autoradiographic study of actinide sorption on
climax stock granite. ORNL-5617, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy.
Beauwens T, De Cannière P, Moors H, Wang L, Maes N, 2005. Studying the migration behaviour
of selenate in Boom Clay by electromigration. Engineering Geology, 77, pp 285–293.
Berglund S, Selroos J-O, 2003. Transport properties site descriptive model. Guidelines for evaluation
and modelling. SKB R-03-09, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Berry J A, Hobley J, Lane S A, Littleboy A K, Nash M J, Oliver P, Smith-Briggs J L, Williams
S J, 1989. Solubility and sorption of protactinium in the near-field and far-field environments of a
radioactive waste repository. Analyst, 114, pp 339–347.
Bienvenu P, Cassette P, Andreoletti G, Bé M-M, Comte J, Lépy M-C, 2007. A new determination
of 79Se half-life. Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 65, pp 355–364.
Bolzan J A, Arvía A J, 1962. Hydrolytic equilibria of metallic ions – I: The hydrolysis of Co(II) ion
in NaClO4 solution. Electrochimica Acta, 7, pp 589–599.
Borkovec M, 1997. Origin of 1-pK and 2-pK models for ionizable water-solid interfaces. Langmuir,
13, pp 2608–2613.
Bostick B C, Vairavamurthy M A, Karthikeyan K G, Chorover J, 2002. Cesium Adsorption on
Clay Minerals: an EXAFS spectroscopic investigation. Environmental Science & Technology, 36,
pp 2670–2676.
Bowden J W, Posner A M, Quirk J P, 1977. Ionic adsorption on variable charge mineral surfaces.
Theoretical charge development and titration curves. Australian Journal of Soil Research, 15,
pp 121–136.
Bradbury M H, Baeyens B, 1997. A mechanistic description of Ni and Zn sorption on
Na-montmorillonite Part II: modelling. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 27, pp 223–248.


110                                                                                           R-10-48
Bradbury M H, Baeyens B, 1998. N2-BET surface area measurements on crushed and intact
minerals and rocks: A proposal for estimating sorption transfer factors. Nuclear Technology, 122,
pp 250–253.
Bradbury M H, Baeyens B, 2005a. Experimental measurements and modeling of sorption competition
on montmorillonite. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 69, pp 4187–4197.
Bradbury M H, Baeyens B, 2005b. Modelling the sorption of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Zn(II), Cd(II),
Eu(III), Am(III), Sn(IV), Th(IV), Np(V) and U(VI) on montmorillonite: Linear free energy relation-
ships and estimates of surface binding constants for some selected heavy metals and actinides.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 69, pp 875–892.
Bradbury M H, Baeyens B, 2009a. Sorption modelling on illite Part I: Titration measurements and
the sorption of Ni, Co, Eu and Sn. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 73, pp 990–1003.
Bradbury M H, Baeyens B, 2009b. Sorption modelling on illite. Part II: Actinide sorption and
linear free energy relationships. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 73, pp 1004–1013.
Brandt F, Bosbach D, Krawczyk-Bärsch E, Arnold T, Bernhard G, 2003. Chlorite dissolu-
tion in the acid pH-range: a combined microscopic and macroscopic approach. Geochimica et
Cosmochimica Acta, 67, pp 1451–1461.
Brendler V, Vahle A, Arnold T, Bernhard G, Fanghanel T, 2003. RES3T-Rossendorf expert
system for surface and sorption thermodynamics. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 61, pp
281–291.
Breynaert E, Scheinost A C, Dom D, Rossberg A, Vancluysen J, Gobechiya E, Kirschhock C E A,
Maes A, 2010. Reduction of Se(IV) in Boom Clay: XAS solid phase speciation. Environmental
Science & Technology, 44, pp 6649–6655.
Brunauer S, Emmet P, Teller E, 1938. Adsorption of gases in multimolecular layers. Journal of the
American Chemical Society, 60, pp 309–319.
Bruno J, De Pablo J, Duro L, Figuerola E, 1995. Experimental study and modeling of the U(VI)-
Fe(OH)3 surface precipitation/coprecipitation equilibria. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 59,
pp 4113–4123.
Bruno J, Bosbach D, Kulik D, Navrotsky A, 2007. Chemical thermodynamics of solid solutions
of interest in nuclear waste management: a state-of-the-art report. Paris: Nuclear Energy Agency,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (Chemical Thermodynamics Vol. 10)
Byegård J, Skarnemark G, Skålberg M, 1995. The use of some ion-exchange sorbing tracer cat-
ions in in-situ experiments in high saline groundwaters. In: Murakami T, Ewing R C (eds). Scientific
basis for nuclear waste management XVIII: symposium held in Kyoto, Japan, 23–27 October 1994.
Pittsburgh, PA: Materials Research Society. (Materials Research Society Symposium Proceedings
353), pp 1077–1084.
Byegård J, Johansson H, Skålberg M, Tullborg E-L, 1998. The interaction of sorbing and non-
sorbing tracers with different Äspö rock types. Sorption and diffusion experiments in the laboratory
scale. SKB TR-98-18, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Byegård J, Selnert E, Tullborg E-L, 2008. Bedrock transport properties. Data evaluation
and retardation model. Site descriptive modelling, SDM-Site Forsmark. SKB R-08-98, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Carbol P, Engkvist I, 1997. Compilation of radionuclide sorption coefficients for performance
assessment. SKB R-97-13, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Carslaw H S, Jaeger J C, 1959. Conduction of heat in solids. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon.
Černík M, Borkovec M, Westall J C, 1996. Affinity distribution description of competitive ion
binding to heterogeneous materials. Langmuir, 12, pp 6127–6137.
Choppin G R, 2003. Actinide speciation in the environment. Radiochimica Acta, 91, pp 645–650.
Choppin G R, Bond A H, Hromadka P M, 1997. Redox speciation of plutonium. Journal of
Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 219, pp 203–210.



R-10-48                                                                                             111
Crawford J, 2006. Modelling in support of bedrock transport property assessment. Preliminary site
description. Laxemar subarea – version 1.2. SKB R-06-28, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Crawford J, 2008. Bedrock transport properties Forsmark. Site descriptive modelling, SDM-Site
Forsmark. SKB R-08-48, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Crawford J, Sidborn M, 2009. Bedrock transport properties Laxemar. Site descriptive modelling,
SDM-Site Laxemar. SKB R-08-94, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Crawford J, Neretnieks I, Malmström M, 2006. Data and uncertainty assessment for radionuclide
Kd partitioning coefficients in granitic rock for use in SR-Can calculations. SKB R-06-75, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Cronstrand P, 2005. Assessment of uncertainty intervals for sorption coefficients. SFR-1 uppföljning
av SAFE. SKB R-05-75, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Cui D, Eriksen T E, 1996. Reduction of pertechnetate in solution by heterogeneous electron
transfer from Fe(II)-containing geological material. Environmental Science & Technology, 30,
pp 2263–2269.
Curti E, 1999. Coprecipitation of radionuclides with calcite: estimation of partition coefficients
based on a review of laboratory investigations and geochemical data. Applied Geochemistry, 14,
pp 433–445.
Davis J A, Leckie J O, 1978. Surface ionization and complexation at the oxide/water interface II.
Surface properties of amorphous iron oxyhydroxide and adsorption of metal ions. Journal of Colloid
and Interface Science, 67, pp 90–107.
Davis J A, James R O, Leckie J O, 1978. Surface ionization and complexation at the oxide/water
interface: I. Computation of electrical double layer properties in simple electrolytes. Journal of
Colloid and Interface Science, 63, pp 480–499.
Davis J A, Coston J A, Kent D B, Fuller C C, 1998. Application of the surface complexation
concept to complex mineral assemblages. Environmental Science & Technology, 32, pp 2820–2828.
Duff M C, 2001. Speciation and transformations of sorbed Pu on geologic materials: wet chemical
and spectroscopic observations. In: Kudo A (ed). Plutonium in the environment: edited proceedings
of the Second Invited International Symposium, Osaka, Japan, 9–12 November 1999. Amsterdam:
Elsevier. (Radioactivity in the Environment 1), pp 139–157.
Duff M C, Hunter D B, Triay I R, Bertsch P M, Reed D T, Sutton S R, Shea-McCarthy G,
Kitten J, Eng P, Chipera S J, Vaniman D T, 1999. Mineral associations and average oxidation
states of sorbed Pu on tuff. Environmental Science & Technology, 33, pp 2163–2169.
Duff M C, Hunter D B, Triay I R, Bertsch P M, Kitten J, Vaniman D T, 2001. Comparison of
two micro-analytical methods for detecting the spatial distribution of sorbed Pu on geologic materials.
Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 47, pp 211–218.
Duro L, Grivé M, Cera E, Domènech C, Bruno J, 2006. Update of a thermodynamic database
for radionuclides to assist solubility limits calculation for performance assessment. SKB TR-06-17,
Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Dyer J A, Trivedi P, Scrivner N C, Sparks D L, 2004. Surface complexation modeling of zinc
sorption onto ferrihydrite. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 270, pp 56–65.
Dzombak D A, Morel F M M, 1990. Surface complexation modeling: hydrous ferric oxide. New
York: Wiley.
Eisenman G, 1962. Cation selective glass electrodes and their mode of operation. Biophysical
Journal, 2, pp 259–323.
Elert M, Gylling B, Lindgren M, 2004. Assessment model validity document FARF31. SKB R-04-51,
Svensk Kärnbränlsehantering AB.
Elzinga E J, Sparks D L, 1999. Nickel sorption mechanisms in a pyrophyllite-montmorillonite
mixture. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 213, pp 506–512.




112                                                                                             R-10-48
Essén S A, Johnsson A, Bylund D, Pedersen K, Lundström U S, 2007. Siderophore production
by Pseudomonas stutzeri under anaerobic conditions. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 73,
pp 5857–5864.
Farley K J, Dzombak D A, Morel F M M, 1985. A surface precipitation model for the sorption of
cations on metal oxides. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 106, pp 226–242.
Fawcett W R, 2006. The effects of ion size on double layer properties: theory and monte carlo
simulations. Interface Science and Technology, 11, pp 112–132.
Fernandes M M, Stumpf T, Baeyens B, Walther C, Bradbury M H, 2010. Spectroscopic
Identification of Ternary Cm−Carbonate Surface Complexes. Environmental Science & Technology,
44, pp 921–927.
Gascoyne M, Schwarcz H P, 1986. Radionuclide migration over recent geologic time in a granitic
pluton. Chemical Geology: Isotope Geoscience section, 59, pp 75–85.
Gascoyne M, Miller N H, Neymark L A, 2002. Uranium-series disequilibrium in tuffs from Yucca
Mountain, Nevada, as evidence of pore-fluid flow over the last million years. Applied Geochemistry,
17, pp 781–792.
Glynn P D, Voss C I, 1999. Geochemical characterization of Simpevarp ground waters near the
Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory. SKI Report 96:29, Statens kärnkraftinspektion (Swedish Nuclear
Power Inspectorate).
Goldberg S, Criscenti L J, Turner D R, Davis J A, Cantrell K J, 2007. Adsorption desorption
processes in subsurface reactive transport modeling. Vadose Zone Journal, 6, pp 407–435.
Grandia F, Merino J, Bruno J, 2008. Assessment of the radium-barium co-precipitation
and its potential influence on the solubility of Ra in the near-field. SKB TR-08-07, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Grenthe I, Stumm W, Laaksoharju M, Nilsson A C, Wikberg P, 1992. Redox potentials and
redox reactions in deep groundwater systems. Chemical Geology, 98, pp 131–150.
Grenthe I, Plyasunov A V, Spahiu K, 1997. Estimations of medium effects on thermodynamic data.
In: Grenthe I, Puigdomenech I (eds). Modelling in aquatic chemistry. Paris: OECD Nuclear Energy
Agency, pp 325–426.
Hachiya K, Sasaki M, Ikeda T, Mikami N, Yasunaga T, 1984. Static and kinetic studies of
adsorption-desorption of metal ions on a γ-alumina surface. 2. Kinetic study by means of pressure-
jump technique. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 88, pp 27–31.
Haworth A, 1990. A review of the modelling of sorption from aqueous solution. Advances in
Colloid and Interface Science, 32, pp 43–78.
Hayes K F, Leckie J O, 1987. Mechanism of lead ion adsorption at the goethite-water interface.
In: Davis J A, Hayes K F (eds). Geochemical processes at mineral surfaces. Washington, D.C.:
American Chemical Society. (ACS Symposium Series 323), pp 114–141.
Hiemstra T, Van Riemsdijk W H, 1996. A Surface Structural Approach to Ion Adsorption: The
Charge Distribution (CD) Model. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 179, pp 488–508.
Hiemstra T, De Wit J C M, Van Riemsdijk W H, 1989a. Multisite proton adsorption modeling at
the solid/solution interface of (hydr)oxides: A new approach: II. Application to various important
(hydr)oxides. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 133, pp 105–117.
Hiemstra T, Van Riemsdijk W H, Bolt G H, 1989b. Multisite proton adsorption modeling at the
solid/solution interface of (hydr)oxides: A new approach: I. Model description and evaluation of
intrinsic reaction constants. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 133, pp 91–104.
Hiemstra T, Venema P, Van Riemsdijk W H V, 1996. Intrinsic proton affinity of reactive surface
groups of metal (hydr)oxides: The bond valence principle. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
184, pp 680–692.
Holzbecher E, 2000. “Predicted retardations of concentration fronts using a mass-balance approach”
by Ronald K. Stoesell. Ground Water, 38, pp 808–809.



R-10-48                                                                                          113
Huitti T, Hakanen M, Lindberg A, 1996. Sorption of cesium, radium, protactinium, uranium,
neptunium, and plutonium on rapakivi granite. Posiva 96-23, Posiva Oy, Finland.
Huitti T, Hakanen M, Lindberg A, 1998. Sorption of cesium on Olkiluoto mica gneiss, granodiorite
and granite. Posiva 98-11, Posiva Oy, Finland.
Hummel W, Berner U, Curti E, Pearson F J, Thoenen T, 2002. Nagra/PSI Chemical
Thermodynamic Data Base 01/01. Radiochimica Acta, 90, pp 805–813.
Ilton E S, Haiduc A, Moses C O, Heald S M, Elbert D C, Veblen D R, 2004. Heterogeneous
reduction of uranyl by micas: Crystal chemical and solution controls. Geochimica et Cosmochimica
Acta, 68, pp 2417–2435.
Ittner T, Torstenfelt B, Allard B, 1988. Migration of the fission products strontium, technetium,
iodine, cesium and the actinides neptunium, plutonium, americium in granitic rock. SKB TR 88-02,
Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
IUPAC, 1997. Compendium of chemical terminology: IUPAC recommendations. 2nd ed. Oxford:
Blackwell Science.
Jan Y-L, Wang T-H, Li M-H, Tsai S-C, Wei Y-Y, Hsu C-N, Teng S-P, 2007. Evaluating adsorption
ability of granite to radioselenium by chemical sequential extraction. Journal of Radioanalytical and
Nuclear Chemistry, 273, pp 299–306.
Jan Y-L, Wang T-H, Li M-H, Tsai S-C, Wei Y-Y, Teng S-P, 2008. Adsorption of Se species on
crushed granite: A direct linkage with its internal iron-related minerals. Applied Radiation and
Isotopes, 66, pp 14–23.
Jenne E A (ed), 1998. Adsorption of metals by geomedia: variables, mechanisms, and model
applications. London: Academic Press.
Johnsson A, Arlinger J, Pedersen K, Ödegaard-Jensen A, Abinsson Y, 2006. Solid-aqueous
phase partitioning of radionuclides by complexing compounds excreted by subsurface bacteria.
Geomicrobiology Journal, 23, pp 621–630.
Katz L E, Hayes K F, 1995. Surface complexation modeling: II. Strategy for modeling polymer
and precipitation reactions at high surface coverage. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 170,
pp 491–501.
Kienzler B, Vejmelka P, Römer J, Schild D, 2009. Actinide migration in fractures of granite host
rock: laboratory and in-situ investigations. Nuclear Technology, 165, pp 223–240.
Kim Y, Kirkpatrick R J, 1997. 23Na and 133Cs NMR study of cation adsorption on mineral surfaces:
Local environments, dynamics, and effects of mixed cations. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 61,
pp 5199–5208.
Kinniburgh D G, 1986. General purpose adsorption isotherms. Environmental Science &
Technology, 20, pp 895–904.
Kulik D A, 2002. Sorption modelling by Gibbs energy minimisation: towards a uniform thermody-
namic database for surface complexes of radionuclides. Radiochimica Acta, 90, pp 815–832.
Kulik D A, 2006. Classic adsorption isotherms incorporated in modern surface complexation
models: implications for sorption of actinides. Radiochimica Acta, 94, pp 765–778.
Kulmala S, Hakanen M, 1993. The solubility of Zr, Nb and Ni in groundwater and concrete water,
and sorption on crushed rock and cement. Report YJT-93-21, Nuclear Waste Commission of Finnish
Power Companies.
Kulmala S, Hakanen M, 1995. Sorption of alkaline-earth elements Sr, Ba and Ra from groundwater
on rocks from TVO investigation areas. Report YJT-95-03, Nuclear Waste Commission of Finnish
Power Companies.
Kulmala S, Hakanen M, Lindberg A, 1996. Sorption of protactinium on rocks in groundwaters
from Posiva investigation sites. Posiva 96-18, Posiva Oy, Finland.
Kulmala S, Hakanen M, Lindberg A, 1998. Sorption of plutonium on rocks in groundwaters from
Posiva investigation sites. Posiva 98-12, Posiva Oy, Finland.



114                                                                                            R-10-48
Kurosawa S, James S C, Yui M, Ibaraki M, 2006. Model analysis of the colloid and radionuclide
retardation experiment at the Grimsel Test Site. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 298,
pp 467–475.
Laaksoharju M, Smellie J, Tullborg E-L, Gimeno M, Hallbeck L, Molinero J, Waber N, 2008.
Bedrock hydrogeochemistry Forsmark. Site descriptive modelling, SDM-Site Forsmark. SKB R-08-47,
Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Laaksoharju M, Smellie J, Tullborg E-L, Wallin B, Drake H, Gascoyne M, Gimeno M, Gurban
I, Hallbeck L, Molinero J, Nilsson A-C, Waber N, 2009. Bedrock hydrogeochemistry Laxemar.
Site descriptive modelling, SDM-Site Laxemar. SKB R-08-93, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Langmuir D, 1997. Aqueous environmental geochemistry. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Langmuir I, 1918. The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of glass, mica and platinum. Journal of
the American Chemical Society, 40, pp 1361–1403.
Latimer, 1926. The energy of solution of gaseous ions in relation to the effect of a charge upon the
dielectric. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 48, pp 1234–1239.
Lee S Y, Baik M H, Lee Y B, 2009a. Adsorption of uranyl ions and microscale distribution on
Fe-bearing mica. Applied Clay Science, 44, pp 259–264.
Lee S Y, Baik M H, Lee Y J, Lee Y B, 2009b. Adsorption of U(VI) ions on biotite from aqueous
solutions. Applied Clay Science, 46(3), pp 255–259.
Liu C, Zachara J M, Zhong L, Heald S M, Wang Z, Jeon B-H, Fredrickson J K, 2009.
Microbial Reduction of Intragrain U(VI) in Contaminated Sediment. Environmental Science &
Technology, 43, pp 4928–4933.
Lützenkirchen J, 1999. The constant capacitance model and variable ionic strength: an evaluation
of possible applications and applicability. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 217, pp 8–18.
Lützenkirchen J (ed), 2006. Surface complexation modelling. Amsterdam: Academic Press.
(Interface Science and Technology 11)
Madsen L, 2006. Calcite: surface charge. In: Encyclopedia of surface and colloid science. 2nd ed.
London: Taylor & Francis, pp 1084–1096.
Malmström M, Banwart S, Lewenhagen J, Duro L, Bruno J, 1996. The dissolution of biotite and
chlorite at 25°C in the near-neutral pH region. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 21, pp 201–213.
Marques Fernandes M, Baeyens B, Bradbury M H, 2008. The influence of carbonate complex-
ation on lanthanide/actinide sorption on montmorillonite. Radiochimica Acta, 96, pp 691–697.
McKinley I G, Scholtis A, 1993. A comparison of radionuclide sorption databases used in recent
performance assessments. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 13, pp 347–363.
McKinley J P, Jenne E A, 1991. Experimental investigation and review of the “solids concentra-
tion” effect in adsorption studies. Environmental Science & Technology, 25, pp 2082–2087.
McKinley J P, Zachara J M, Heald S M, Dohnalkova A, Newville M G, Sutton S R, 2004.
Microscale distribution of cesium sorbed to biotite and muscovite. Environmental Science &
Technology, 38, pp 1017–1023.
Miller W, Alexander W R, Chapman N, McKinley I, Smellie J (eds), 2000. Geological disposal
of radioactive wastes and natural analogues: lessons from nature and archaeology. Oxford:
Pergamon.
NEA, 2001a. Confidence in models of radionuclide transport for site-specific assessment: workshop
proceedings, Carlsbad, New Mexico, USA, 14–17 June 1999. Paris: Nuclear Energy Agency,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
NEA, 2001b. Using thermodynamic sorption models for guiding radioelement distribution coeffi-
cient (Kd) investigations: a status report. Paris: Nuclear Energy Agency, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.




R-10-48                                                                                           115
NEA, 2005. NEA Sorption Project, phase II: interpretation and prediction of radionuclide sorption
onto substrates relevant for radioactive waste disposal using thermodynamic sorption models. Paris:
Nuclear Energy Agency, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Neretnieks I, 1980. Diffusion in the rock matrix: An important factor in radionuclide retardation.
Journal of Geophysical Research, 85, pp 4397–4379.
Neretnieks I, 2002. Using 222Rn to assess the fracture apertures in fractured rocks. In: Findikakis
A. N. (ed). Proceedings of International Groundwater Symposium. Symposium held in Berkeley,
California, 25–28 March, 2002, pp 1–9.
Neretnieks I, Rasmuson A, 1984. An approach to modeling radionuclide migration in a medium
with strongly varying velocity and block sizes along a flowpath. Water Resources Research, 20,
pp 1823–1836.
Nilsson K, Byegård J, Selnert E, Widestrand H, 2010. Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory. Long term
sorption diffusion experiment (LTDE-SD). Results from rock sample analyses and modelling.
SKB R-10-68, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
NIST, 2010. NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods. [Online]. Available at:
http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/. [16 December 2010].
Noe D C, Veblen D R, 1999. HRTEM analysis of dislocation cores and stacking faults in naturally
deformed biotite crystals. American Mineralogist, 84, pp 1925–1931.
Ochs M, Talerico C, 2004. SR-Can. Data and uncertainty asessment. Migration parameters for the
bentonite buffer in the KBS-3 concept. SKB TR-04-18, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Ochs M, Davis J A, Olin M, Payne T E, Tweed C J, Askarieh M M, Altmann S, 2006a. Use of
thermodynamic sorption models to derive radionuclide Kd values for performance assessment: selected
results and recommendations of the NEA sorption project. Radiochimica Acta, 94, pp 779–785.
Ochs M, Talerico C, Sellin P, Hedin A, 2006b. Derivation of consistent sorption and diffusion
parameters and their uncertainties for compacted MX-80 bentonite. Physics and Chemistry of the
Earth, Parts A/B/C, 31, pp 600–609.
Olin M, Puukko E, Puhakka E, Lehikoinen J, Lindberg A, Hakanen M, 2006. Sorption of nickel
on biotite. VTT-R-08046-06, Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT).
Painter S, Mancillas J, 2009. MARFA version 3.2.2 user’s manual: migration analysis of radio­
nuclides in the far field. SKB R-09-56, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Papelis C, 2001. Cation and anion sorption on granite from the Project Shoal Test Area, near Fallon,
Nevada, USA. Advances in Environmental Research, 5, pp 151–166.
Park C-K, Baik M-H, 2009. Diffusion of some chemical species through a granite considering their
geochemical properties. Korean Journal of Chemical Engineering, 26, pp 1279–1285.
Parkhurst D L, Appelo C A J, 1999. User’s guide to PHREEQC (version 2): a computer program
for speciation, batch-reaction, one-dimensional transport, and inverse geochemical calculations.
Water-Resources Investigations Report 99-4259, U.S. Geological Survey, Denver, Colorado.
Pauling L, 1929. The principles determining the structure of complex ionic crystals. Journal of the
American Chemical Society, 51, pp 1010–1026.
Pinnioja S, Jaakkola T, Kämäräinen E-L, Koskinen A, Lindberg A, 1984. Sorption of carbon,
cobalt, nickel, strontium, iodine, cesium, americium, and neptunium in rocks and minerals. Report
YJT-84-19, Nuclear Waste Commission of Finnish Power Companies.
Poinssot C, Baeyens B, Bradbury M H, 1999. Experimental and modelling studies of caesium
sorption on illite. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 63, pp 3217–3227.
Prelot B, Janusz W, Thomas F, Villieras F, Charmas R, Piasecki W, Rudzinski W, 2002.
Adsorption of cadmium ions at the electrolyte/silica interface: I. Experimental study of surface
properties. Applied Surface Science, 196, pp 322–330.
Przylibski T A, 2000. Estimating the radon emanation coefficient from crystalline rocks into
groundwater. Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 53, pp 473–479.



116                                                                                            R-10-48
Puigdomenech I, Rard J A, Plyasunov A V, Grenthe I, 1999. TDB-4. Temperature corrections
to thermodynamic data and enthalpy calculations. Le Seine-St. Germain: OECD Nuclear Energy
Agency.
Rasilainen K, Suksi J, Ruskeeniemi T, Pitkanen P, Poteri A, 2003. Release of uranium from
rock matrix--a record of glacial meltwater intrusions? Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 61,
pp 235–246.
Regenspurg S, Schild D, Schäfer T, Huber F, Malmström M E, 2009. Removal of uranium(VI)
from the aqueous phase by iron(II) minerals in presence of bicarbonate. Applied Geochemistry, 24,
pp 1617–1625.
Righetto L, Azimonti G, Missana T, Bidoglio G, 1995. The triple layer model revised. Colloids
and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 95, pp 141–157.
Rosenqvist J, 2002. Surface chemistry of Al and Si (hydr)oxides, with emphasis on nano-sized
gibbsite (α-Al(OH)3). Ph.D. thesis. Umeå University, Sweden.
Rusch U, Borkovec M, Daicic J, van Riemsdijk W H, 1997. Interpretation of competitive
adsorption isotherms in terms of affinity distributions. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 191,
pp 247–255.
Sahai N, 2000. Estimating sorption enthalpies and affinity sequences of monovalent electrolyte ions
on xide surfaces in aqueous solutions. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 64, pp 3629–3641.
Salas J, Gimeno M J, Auqué L F, Molinero J, Gómez J, Juárez I, 2010. SR-Site – hydrogeo-
chemical evolution of the Forsmark site. SKB TR-10-58, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Sandström B, Stephens M B, 2009. Mineralogy, geochemistry, porosity and redox properties of
rocks from Forsmark. Compilation of data fom the regional model volume for SR-Site. SKB R-09-51,
Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Sandström B, Tullborg E-L, Smellie J, MacKenzie A, Suksi J, 2008. Fracture mineralogy of the
Forsmark site. SDM-Site Forsmark. SKB R-08-102, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Scheidegger A M, Fendorf M, Sparks D L, 1996. Mechanisms of nickel sorption on pyrophyllite:
macroscopic and microscopic approaches. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 60, pp 1763–1772.
Schindler P W, Fürst B, Dick R, Wolf P U, 1976. Ligand properties of surface silanol groups. I.
surface complex formation with Fe3+, Cu2+, Cd2+, and Pb2+. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
55, pp 469–475.
Selnert E, Byegård J, Widestrand H, Carlsten S, Döse C, Tullborg E-L, 2009. Bedrock transport
properties. Data evaluation and retardation model. Site descriptive modelling, SDM-Site Laxemar.
SKB R-08-100, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Seo Y S, Jeong G C, Kim J S, Ichikawa Y, 2002. Microscopic observation and contact stress
analysis of granite under compression. Engineering Geology, 63, pp 259–275.
Shibutani T, Suyama T, Shibata M, 1999. Sorption database for radionuclides on bentonite and
rocks (in Japanese with English abstract). JNC Technical Report TN8410 99-050, Japan Nuclear
Cycle Development Institute.
Sidborn M, Sandström B, Tullborg E-L, Delos A, Molinero J, Hallbeck L, Pedersen K, 2010.
SR-Site: Oxygen ingress in the rock at Forsmark during a glacial cycle. SKB TR-10-57, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB. /slutgiltig titel?/
Singer D M, Maher K, Brown Jr. G E, 2009. Uranyl–chlorite sorption/desorption: evaluation of
different U(VI) sequestration processes. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 73, pp 5989–6007.
SKB, 2004. RETROCK Project. Treatment of geosphere retention phenomena in safety assessments.
Scientific basis of retention processes and their implementation in safety assessment models (WP2).
Work package 2 report of the RETROCK concerted action. SKB R-04-48, Svensk Kärbränsle­
hantering AB.
SKB, 2006. Long-term safety for KBS-3 repositories at Forsmark and Laxemar – a first evaluation.
Main report of the SR-Can project. SKB TR-06-09, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.



R-10-48                                                                                              117
SKB, 2010a. Climate and climate-related issues for the safety assessment SR-Site. SKB TR-10-49,
Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
SKB, 2010b. Data report for the safety assessment SR-Site. SKB TR-10-52, Svensk Kärnbränsle­
hantering AB.
SKB, 2010c. Geosphere process report for the safety assessment SR-Site. SKB TR-10-48, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB.
SKB, 2010d. Radionuclide transport report for the safety assessment SR-Site. SKB TR-10-50, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB.
SKB, 2011. Long-term safety for the final repository for spent nuclear fuel at Forsmark. Main report
of the SR-Site project. SKB TR-11-01, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Skopp J, 2009. Derivation of the Freundlich adsorption isotherm from kinetics. Journal of Chemical
Education, 86, p 1341.
Sparks D L, 2003. Environmental soil chemistry. 2nd ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sposito G, 1998. On Points of Zero Charge. Environmental Science & Technology, 32, pp 2815–2819.
Stenhouse M, Jégou C, Brown P, Meinrath G, Nitsche H, Ekberg C, 2008. Review of SR-Can:
Evaluation of SKB’s handling of spent fuel performance, radionuclide chemistry and geosphere
transport parameters. External review contribution in support of SKI’s and SSI’s review of SR-Can.
SKI Report 2008:17, Statens kärnkraftinspektion (Swedish Nuclear Power Inspectorate).
Stipp S L S, 1999. Toward a conceptual model of the calcite surface: hydration, hydrolysis, and
surface potential. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 63, pp 3121–3131.
Stipp S L S, Konnerup-Madsen J, Franzreb K, Kulik A, Mathieu H J, 1998. Spontaneous move-
ment of ions through calcite at standard temperature and pressure. Nature, 396, pp 356–359.
Stumm W, Hohl H, Dalang F, 1976. Interaction of metal ions with hydrous oxide surfaces. Croatica
Chemica Acta, 48, pp 491–504.
Stumm W, Morgan J, 1996. Aquatic chemistry: chemical equilibria and rates in natural waters. 3rd
ed. New York: Wiley.
Stumpf T, Bauer A, Coppin F, Fanghänel T, Kim J-I, 2002. Inner-sphere, outer-sphere and ternary
surface complexes: a TRLFS study of the sorption process of Eu(III) onto smectite and kaolinite.
Radiochimica Acta, 90, pp 345–349.
Suksi J, Rasilainen K, Casanova J, Ruskeeniemi T, Blomqvist R, Smellie J A T, 2001. U-series
disequilibria in a groundwater flow route as an indicator of uranium migration processes. Journal of
Contaminant Hydrology, 47, pp 187–196.
Sverjensky D A, 2003. Standard states for the activities of mineral surface sites and species.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 67, pp 17–28.
Tachi Y, Shibutani T, Sato H, Yui M, 1998. Sorption and diffusion behavior of selenium in tuff.
Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 35, pp 77–89.
Tachi Y, Shibutani T, Sato H, Shibata M, 1999. Sorption and diffusion behaviour of Palladium in
bentonite, granodiorite and tuff. JNC Technical Report TN8400, Japan Nuclear Cycle Development
Institute.
Teppen B J, Miller D M, 2006. Hydration energy determines isovalent cation exchange selectivity
by clay minerals. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 70, pp 31–40.
Ticknor K V, McMurray J, 1996. A study of selenium and tin sorption on granite and goethite.
Radiochmica Acta, 73, pp 149–156.
Ticknor K V, Vandergraaf T T, McMurry J, Boisvenue L, Wilkin D, 1996. Parametric studies of
factors affecting Se and Sn sorption. AECL TR-723, COG-95-554, Atomic Energy of Canada Limited.
Tsai S-C, Wang T-H, Li M-H, Wei Y-Y, Teng S-P, 2009. Cesium adsorption and distribution onto
crushed granite under different physicochemical conditions. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 161,
pp 854–861.



118                                                                                              R-10-48
Turner D R, Pabalan R T, 1999. Abstraction of mechanistic sorption model results for performance
assessment calculations at Yucca Mountain, Nevada. Waste Management, 19, pp 375–388.
Um W, Papelis C, 2003. Metal ion sorption and desorption on zeolitized tuffs from the nevada test
site. Environmental Science & Technology, 38, pp 496–502.
Van Cappellen P, Charlet L, Stumm W, Wersin P, 1993. A surface complexation model of the car-
bonate mineral-aqueous solution interface. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 57, pp 3505–3518.
van Hal R E G, Eijkel J C T, Bergveld P, 1996. A general model to describe the electrostatic
potential at electrolyte oxide interfaces. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 69, pp 31–62.
Vandergraaf T T, Abry D R M, Davis C E, 1982. The use of autoradiography in determining the
distribution of radionuclides sorbed on thin sections of plutonic rocks from the Canadian Shield.
Chemical Geology, 36, pp 139–154.
Vandergraaf T T, Ticknor K V, Melnyk T W, 1993. The selection of a sorption data base for the
geosphere model in the Canadian Nuclear Fuel Waste Management Program. Journal of Contaminant
Hydrology, 13, pp 327–345.
Venema P, Hiemstra T, Weidler P G, van Riemsdijk W H, 1998. Intrinsic Proton affinity of reactive
surface groups of metal (hydr)oxides: application to iron (hydr)oxides. Journal of Colloid and Interface
Science, 198, pp 282–295.
Villalobos M, Leckie J O, 2001. Surface complexation modeling and FTIR study of carbonate
adsorption to goethite. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 235, pp 15–32.
Vinson D S, Vengosh A, Hirschfeld D, Dwyer G S, 2009. Relationships between radium and
radon occurrence and hydrochemistry in fresh groundwater from fractured crystalline rocks, North
Carolina (USA). Chemical Geology, 260, pp 159–171.
Wang P, Anderko A, 2001. Thermodynamic Modeling of the Adsorption of Radionuclides on
Selected Minerals. I: Cations. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, 40, pp 4428–4443.
Wehrli B, Ibric S, Stumm W, 1990. Adsorption kinetics of vanadyl (IV) and chromium (III) to
aluminum oxide: Evidence for a two-step mechanism. Colloids and Surfaces, 51, pp 77–88.
White A F, Brantley S L, 2003. The effect of time on the weathering of silicate minerals: why do
weathering rates differ in the laboratory and field? Chemical Geology, 202, pp 479–506.
Widestrand H, Byegård J, Kronberg M, Nilsson K, Höglund S, Gustafsson E, 2010a. Äspö
Hard Rock Laboratory. Long Term Sorption Diffusion Experiment (LTDE-SD). Performance
of main in-situ experiment and results from water phase measurements. SKB R-10-67, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Widestrand H, Byegård J, Selnert E, Skålberg M, Höglund S, Gustafsson E, 2010b. Long
Term Sorption Diffusion Experiment (LTDE-SD). Supporting laboratory program - Sorption
diffusion experiments and rock material characterisation. With supplement of adsorption studies
on intact rock samples from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations. SKB R-10-66, Svensk
Kärnbränslehantering AB.
Wold S, 2009. Sorption of prioritized elements on montmorillonite colloids and their potential to
transport radionuclides. SKB TR-10-20, Svensk Kärnbränlsehantering AB.
Wu C-H, Kuo C-Y, Lin C-F, Lo S-L, 2002. Modeling competitive adsorption of molybdate, sulfate,
selenate, and selenite using a Freundlich-type multi-component isotherm. Chemosphere, 47, pp 283–292.
Xu S, Harsh J B, 1990. Monovalent cation selectivity quantitatively modeled according to hard/soft
acid/base theory. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 54, pp 357–363.
Yamaguchi T, Nakayama S, 1998. Diffusivity of U, Pu and Am carbonate complexes in a granite
from Inada, Ibaraki, Japan studied by through diffusion. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 35,
pp 55–65.
Yamaguchi T, Nakayama S, Okamoto H, 2002. Effective diffusivity of neptunium and plutonium
in granite from Inada, Ibaraki, Japan under anaerobic conditions. Radiochimica Acta, 90, pp 863–868.




R-10-48                                                                                               119
Zachara J M, Smith S C, Liu C, McKinley J P, Serne R J, Gassman P L, 2002. Sorption of Cs+
to micaceous subsurface sediments from the Hanford site, USA. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta,
66, pp 193–211.
Zazzi Å, 2009. Chlorite: Geochemical properties, dissolution kinetics and Ni(II) sorption. Ph.D.
thesis. Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden.
Zhu C, 2002. Estimation of surface precipitation constants for sorption of divalent metals onto
hydrous ferric oxide and calcite. Chemical Geology, 188, pp 23–32.
Zhu C, 2004. Coprecipitation in the barite isostructural family: 1. Binary mixing properties.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 68, pp 3327–3337.




120                                                                                             R-10-48
                                                                                           Appendix A

 Estimation of groundwater trace constituent concentrations for
 ion-exchange modelling
 In the hydrochemical simulations used to establish groundwater compositions for SR-Site, only the major
 constituents are considered. The major cations are Ca2+, Na+, Mg2+, K+, and Fe2+/Fe3+ while the major
 anions are Cl–, HCO –3 , PO 42–, and HS–/SO 42–. In order to calculate groundwater chemistry correction
 factors for the ion-exchanging solutes, however, it is also necessary to know the background concentra-
 tions of the minor groundwater constituents (including naturally occurring isotopes) that might compete
 for electrostatic binding sites with transported radionuclides. Specifically, we are interested in
 estimating the concentrations of Rb+, Cs+, Sr2+, Ba2+, and Ra2+ in order to include these in the ion-
 exchange calculations.
 Although these data are not available for the projections of groundwater chemistry in SR-Site, there
 is a considerable database of groundwater analyses that was compiled during the site investigations
 for Forsmark /Laaksoharju et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Laaksoharju et al. 2009/. If it is assumed that
 future states follow the same systematic trends as reflected in the present day chemical compositions,
 this information can be used to estimate the most likely concentration ranges for the minor solutes.
 In order to do this, however, it is necessary to identify the best correlating variables that describe
 these variations. Generally it was found that a power law correlation with Ca concentration as the
 independent variable was the best predictor of trace component concentration in the cases of Sr, Cs,
 and Rb (see Figure A-1 to Figure A-3). The correlation with Ca was found to be particularly good for
 Sr. While this could be a consequence of groundwater dilution (as indicated in Figure A-1) it is also
 consistent with ion-exchange competition or Sr solid solution formation with calcite.


            1000
                       Laxemar data (L2.3)
                       Forsmark data (F2.3)
                       Lx robust regression
             100
                       Fm robust regression
                       Dilution line (Sr/Ca = 0.01)



              10



Sr (mg/l)
               1




             0.1




            0.01
                   1             10                   100          1000   10000   100000

                                                            Ca (mg/l)

 Figure A-1. Cross plot of measured Sr (mg/l) concentrations in groundwater versus Ca (mg/l) where data
 are taken from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation database. A least squares regression curve
 is shown for each site assuming a power law correlation with Ca as well as a theoretical dilution line
 assuming Sr concentration equal to 1% of the Ca concentration.




 R-10-48                                                                                             121
            100


                       Laxemar data (L2.3)
                       Forsmark data (F2.3)
                       Lx robust regression
             10
                       Fm robust regression
                       Fm & Lx robust regression




Cs (mg/l)     1




             0.1




            0.01
                   1           10                  100           1000       10000   100000
                                                         Ca (mg/l)

 Figure A-2. Cross plot of measured Cs (mg/l) concentrations in groundwater versus Ca (mg/l) where data
 are taken from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation database. Power-law regression curves are
 shown for each site considered separately as well as a curve for data pooled from both sites.


        1000


                       Laxemar data (L2.3)
                       Forsmark data (F2.3)
                       Lx robust regression
                       Fm robust regression
            100        Fm & Lx robust regression




Rb (µg/l)



             10




              1
                   1           10                  100               1000   10000   100000

                                                         Ca (mg/l)

 Figure A-3. Cross plot of measured Rb (µg/l) concentrations in groundwater versus Ca (mg/l) where data
 are taken from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation database. Power-law regression curves are
 shown for each site considered separately as well as a curve for data pooled from both sites.




 122                                                                                             R-10-48
 Barium and radium were given special consideration since they may be mutually correlated by way
 of barite equilibrium/radiobarite co-precipitation in the groundwater. As can be readily seen from
 Figure A-4, the Ba and SO4 content of the Forsmark and Laxemar groundwater do not appear to be cor-
 related, although the compositions are relatively close to the theoretical locus of values obtained when
 barite is assumed to be the solubility controlling solid for Ba. In most cases, the concentrations of Ba
 and SO4 appear to be slightly oversaturated, although this could be related to the presence of complexed
 sulphate species (CaSO4 in particular) which are not accounted for in the theoretical solubility calcula-
 tion. In the more saline groundwaters represented at Forsmark and Laxemar, the total SO4 concentration
 can be as much as 2–3 times the free concentration owing to the presence of complexed sulphate
 species. The apparent oversaturation is therefore consistent with the behaviour of saline groundwater.
 Although the data suggest near equilibrium conditions with respect to barite solubility, Ba was also
 found to correlate relatively well with the Ca content of the groundwater as shown in Figure A-5.
 Radium and barium were found to be only very weakly correlated, although the scatter is somewhat
 larger for the Laxemar data set. Since a greater proportion of the variation could be explained by
 correlation with Ca concentration, this was used a basis for estimating background concentrations
 of this element.
 In the ion-exchange calculations used to estimate chemistry correction factors, the site specific cor-
 relations with Ca concentration were used to estimate the background concentrations of Sr, Cs, Rb,
 Ba, and Ra assuming that the established correlations are approximately valid for future groundwater
 states. The unknown concentrations were estimated stochastically using a power law correlation defined
 in the following form:
 log10 [Mz+] = a+b·log10 [Ca2+] + σ Rn (0,1)						(A-1)
 Where a and b are the regression parameters obtained by robust linear least squares optimisation and
 s is the residual component of random variation that could not be related to the total Ca concentration.
 The Rn (0,1) term represents a random normal deviate with mean of zero and variance of unity.
 The site-specific regression parameters are summarised in Table A-1.


             1.0E-04
                                                                  Laxemar data (L2.3)
                                                                  Forsmark data (F2.3)
                                                                  Barite equilibrium (12°C)
                                                                  Barite equilibrium (25°C)
             1.0E-05




Ba (mol/l)   1.0E-06




             1.0E-07




             1.0E-08
                  1.0E-05   1.0E-04           1.0E-03           1.0E-02                  1.0E-01

                                           SO4 (mol/l)

 Figure A-4. Cross plot of measured total Ba (mol/l) concentrations in groundwater versus total sulphate,
 SO4 (mol/l) where data are taken from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation database. Curves are
 also drawn showing the locus of concentrations describing theoretical barite equilibrium at 12°C and 25°C,
 respectively (calculated using PHREEQC).




 R-10-48                                                                                                 123
       100000
                           Laxemar data (L2.3)
                           Forsmark data (F2.3)
                           Lx robust regression
                           Fm robust regression
             10000




Ba (µg/l)     1000




               100




                10
                      1           10              100               1000   10000             100000

                                                        Ca (mg/l)

 Figure A-5. Cross plot of measured Ba (µg/l) concentrations in groundwater versus Ca (mg/l) where data
 are taken from the Forsmark (Fm) and Laxemar (Lx) site investigation database. Power-law regression
 curves are shown for each site considered separately.


              1E-11




              1E-12




Ra (mol/l)
              1E-13




              1E-14


                                                                                   Laxemar data (L2.3)
                                                                                   Forsmark data (F2.3)

              1E-15
                      10                100                  1000          10000                 100000

                                                           Ba (µg/l)

 Figure A-6. Cross plot of measured Ra (mol/l) concentrations in groundwater versus Ba (µg/l) where data
 are taken from the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigation database. No regression curves are drawn on
 account of the weak correlation between these solutes.




 124                                                                                                      R-10-48
             1E-11


                                Laxemar data (L2.3)
                                Forsmark data (F2.3)
             1E-12
                                Lx robust regression
                                Fm robust regression


             1E-13



Ra (mol/l)
             1E-14




             1E-15




             1E-16
                     1                 10                  100           1000   10000   100000


                                                                 Ca (mg/l)

 Figure A-7. Cross plot of measured Ra (mol/l) concentrations in groundwater versus Ca (mg/l) where data
 are taken from the Forsmark (Fm) and Laxemar (Lx) site investigation database. Power-law regression
 curves are shown for each site considered separately.


 Table A-1. Correlations between concentrations of minor groundwater constituents and Ca (mg/l)
 as defined by Equation A-1. These are needed to establish relevant background concentrations
 for ion-exchange calculations which are then used to define groundwater chemistry correction
 factors for Sr, Cs, Rb, and Ra sorption in SR-Site.

 Element                 Site   a           b          σ

 Sr (mg/l)               Fm     –2.426      1.143      0.1098
                         Lx     –1.764      0.990      0.06742
 Cs (mg/l)               Fm     –3.771      0.2337     0.3478
                         Lx     –4.463      0.5373     0.2286
 Rb (mg/l)               Fm     –2.264      0.2561     0.2846
                         Lx     –2.917      0.4513     0.1322
 Ba (mg/l)               Fm     –2.399      0.4946     0.3008
                         Lx     –1.602      0.2658     0.3116
 Ra (mol/l)              Fm     –15.12      0.8397     0.2844
                         Lx     –15.71      0.8343     0.4818




 The impact of stochastic uncertainty regarding the actual background concentrations of these minor
 constituents was addressed by complementary simulations in which the concentrations were set at
 constant levels equal to the expected average for the prevailing Ca concentrations projected in the
 SR-Site hydrochemical simulations. It was found that the variation of the chemistry correction factor
 was dominated by the statistics of the major groundwater constituents and the additional uncertainty
 introduced by the assumed correlations for minor constituents had negligible effect.




 R-10-48                                                                                             125
                                                                                         Appendix B

Corroboration of recommended Kd values for radium using natural
tracer data
Given sufficient time in a suitably isolated geological system, a steady-state condition will eventually
be reached whereby daughter radionuclides of the naturally occurring long-lived isotopes 238U, 235U,
and 232Th will be present at activity levels that are identical for each daughter nuclide in the decay
chain. This process is referred to as secular equilibrium. Given that U is relatively soluble under
oxidising or mildly reducing conditions and Th is largely immobile under both oxidising and reducing
conditions, the activity ratios of various U and Th daughters encode qualitative information about
alteration processes that may have occurred in the distant past. Since uranium is a relatively abundant
trace element in granitic rocks, study of the isotopic disequilibrium between its daughter nuclides in
the host rock and fracture coatings is useful for determining the geochronology and hydrochemical
history of sites such as Forsmark and Laxemar (see e.g. /Gascoyne and Schwarcz 1986, Suksi et al.
2001, Gascoyne et al. 2002, Rasilainen et al. 2003/).
In practice, however, it is often difficult to draw robust quantitative conclusions for most U and Th
daughter nuclides owing to uncertainties concerning the reconstruction of boundary conditions and
the duration and timing of hydrochemical gradients imposed on the system at different times. Relative
radium and radon activities in groundwater, on the other hand, (and on account of their short half-
lives) can provide very useful information concerning matrix diffusion and sorption processes over
timescales that are more manageable than those of the U and Th isotopes typically considered in
uranium disequilibrium studies.
In some previous works, measured activities of 222Rn in groundwater have been used to speculate on
transport apertures of flow-bearing fractures in granitic rocks /Andrews et al. 1986, 1989, Neretnieks
2002/. In this appendix, the model described in /Neretnieks 2002/ is extended in a stochastic analysis
to make predictions of expected background activities of 226Ra and 222Rn in groundwater for the
purpose of corroborating the Kd ranges recommended for use in SR-Site for Ra(II) sorption.
Provided flow and transport has occurred for sufficient time that steady-state conditions can be assumed,
the aqueous phase concentration of 226Ra (denoted with subscript A) in the fracture relative to the
equilibrium concentration in the rock matrix is given by as:

                         pA
                bA +
                       (                                            )) 					(B-1)
                       c A( eq )
  cA
c A( eq )
            =
                b +R λ
                 A       fA    A
                                             (
                                   ⋅ 1 − exp − ( bA + R fAλA ) tw

Here, bA is a matrix flux term, pA is the rate of 226Ra production in fracture coatings lining the advective
flowspace, and λA is the decay constant of 226Ra. RfA is a retardation factor accounting for fast equilib-
rium sorption on the fracture coatings. The variable tw is the advective travel time from the point of
origin of infiltrating meteoric water to the groundwater sampling location. This is also equal to the
flowpath length divided by the flow velocity in the advective system. The definitions of the variables
and parameters used in the equations developed in this section can be found in Table B-1.
Provided tw for the particular flowpath is sufficiently large, an equilibrium fracture concentration
will be reached whereby the exponential term in Equation B-1 can be neglected, giving:
                          pA
                bA +
c A( ∞ )               c A( eq ) 								(B-2)
            ≈
c A( eq )       bA + R fAλA




R-10-48                                                                                                 127
Table B-1. Definitions of variables and parameters used in Equations B-1–B-6.

Variable                                                                      Description


                                       0        ηp                           Equilibrium concentration of 226Ra deep
                                       q A = q0                              within the rock matrix under steady-state
                      q  0
                                                θm                           conditions. The parameter q 0A is the rate of
c A( eq ) =              A
                                      
                 R pA N av λA                (103 ⋅ m238U )
                                                             ρ r N Aλ238U
                                                                              production of 226Ra within the matrix pore-
                                                                              water assuming secular equilibrium with
                                       q0 =      Mw
                                                                              238
                                                                                  U. Nav is Avogadro's number, 6.022·1023.
                                      
                                                                              Equilibrium concentration of 222Rn deep
            q A0                                                              within the rock matrix under steady-state
cB( eq ) =                                                                    conditions assuming secular equilibrium
           N av λB
                                                                              with respect to 226Ra.

            2
bA =             θ m λA D pA R pA
        δt                                                                    Rock matrix flux term for 226Ra
D pA ≈ De θ m

            2
bB =             θ m λB D pB
            δt                                                                Rock matrix flux term for 222Rn
D pB ≈ De θ m


R pA = 1 + K dA
             m
                ρr
                              (1 − θ m )
                                                                              Rock matrix retardation factor for 226Ra
                                     θm

                                          δs
R fA = 1 + (θ s + K dA ρs )
                    s                                                         Fracture coating retardation factor for
                                                                              226
                                                                                  Ra. The parameter b is the fraction of
                                          δt                                  the advective flowspace occupied by the
δs     β                                                                      fracture coating and is equal to the ratio of
   =                                                                          fracture coating thickness, δs and transport
δ t (1 − β )                                                                  aperture, δt.


                       δs
R fB = 1 + θ s            ≈1                                                  Fracture coating retardation factor for 222Rn
                       δt

                       ρ sη f (1 − θ s ) δ s                                  Rate of production of 226Ra in the fracture
p A = ATh230                            ⋅                                     coatings from decay of 230Th.
                             N av         δt



If production of 222Ra (the daughter nuclide of 226Ra) in the fracture coatings is constant, the equation
governing the equilibrium concentration of this nuclide (denoted with subscript B) in the fracture is
similar to that given in Equation B-1 although using 222Rn-specific parameters:

                             pB
                  bB +
                        (                                               ))
                                                                             					(B-3)
                         cB ( eq )
  cB
cB ( eq )
             =
                 b +R λ
                   B         fB   B
                                                (
                                      ⋅ 1 − exp − ( bB + R fB λB ) tw

In most cases of relevance for granitic groundwater systems, the matrix flux term bB is smaller than
the decay term RfBλB and thus the equilibrium fracture concentration of 222Rn has a strong inverse
relationship with transport aperture. The concentration of 222Rn measured in boreholes therefore




128                                                                                                                           R-10-48
allows us to speculate on the likely ranges of transport apertures in situ, provided all other parameters
comprising Equation B-3 are well-constrained by independent data.
We consider here the situation whereby 226Ra released from the rock matrix also sorbs on the fracture
coatings lining the advective pore space. In this situation, the rate of production of 222Rn is not
strictly constant, but also depends on tw. Assuming that the recoil capture efficiency of surface
sorbed 226Ra is close to 100%, the production rate of 222Rn in the fracture coating is given by:
pB = RfAλACA(∞) (1–exp(–(bA+RfAλA)tw))						(B-4)
The steady-state mass balance for 222Rn then can be written as:

∂cB
∂tw
                                                             (        (
    = bB cB ( eq ) − ( bB + R fb λB ) cB + R fAλA c A( ∞ ) 1 − exp − ( bA + R fAλA ) tw   )) 		   (B-5)

It should be noted that the expression steady-state here refers strictly to the time rate of concentration
change at any specific location along a flowpath. Although the differential equation is written in terms
of an advective travel time, this is in simply a proxy for the ratio between flowpath length and advective
velocity. Equation B-5 cannot be solved analytically since the variables of concentration and advective
travel time are not separable and therefore a numerical integration is required. For sufficiently large
tw, Equation B-5 can be shown to converge to the fracture concentration equilibrium limit:

                       R fAλAc A( ∞ )
                bB +
cB ( ∞ )                  cB ( eq )     								(B-6)
            ≈
cB ( eq )         bB + R fb λB

In order to use Equation B-2 and B-6 to make predictions of 226Ra and 222Rn in situ concentrations
in situ, it is necessary to define numerical values for the various parameters comprising the mass
balance equations. Since many of these parameters are associated with significant uncertainties, we
use a stochastic analysis whereby assumed uncertainty distributions are used. Certain parameters are
sufficiently well known that constant values can be approximately assigned without introducing
significant errors. These parameter values are given in Table B-2. Model parameters associated
with significant uncertainties are given in Table B-3.
Using the central best estimates of the uncertainty distributions defined in Table B-3 (i.e. median
values of the specified uncertainty distributions), a preliminary simulation was made using Matlab
to obtain the steady state concentrations of 226Ra and 222Rn as a function of advective travel time.
Although the analytical solution for 226Ra could be obtained directly from Equation B-1, it was
necessary to integrate Equation B-5 using a suitable numerical solver to obtain the corresponding
curve for 222Rn. The results of this analysis are shown in Figure B-1 and Figure B-2 and indicate that
equilibrium activities in the fracture water are typically reached for advective travel times in excess
of a few tens of years.


Table B-2. Data constants used in stochastic simulations.

Constant               Value            Description

λ238U                  4.92×10–18 s–1 Decay constant for 238U (t½ = 4.468×109 years)
λA                     1.37×10–11 s–1 Decay constant for 226Ra (t½ = 1,602 years)
λB                     2.10×10–6 s–1    Decay constant for 222Rn (t½ = 3.823 days)
θm                     0.18%            Matrix porosity recommended for use in SR-
                                        Site /SKB 2010b/
θs                     10%              Assumed fracture coating porosity (negligible
                                        effect of uncertainty)
ρr                     2,656 kg/m3      Assumed density of rock matrix (negligible
                                        effect of uncertainty)
ρs                     2,700 kg/m3      Assumed density of fracture coating (negligi-
                                        ble effect of uncertainty)




R-10-48                                                                                                   129
  Table B-3. Uncertainty distributions used in stochastic simulations.

  Variable                     Distribution     Model parameters                      Description/Reference

  ηp (≈ ηf )                   Log-uniform      min–max range = 0.01–0.1              Recoil capture efficiency factor
                                                                                      Approximate range based on discussions
                                                                                      in /Neretnieks 2002/

  De                           Lognormal                  m = −13.7                  Effective diffusivity (m2/s) recommended for
                                                log10 De  10                         use in SR-Site /SKB 2010b/
                                                          σ 10 = 0.2

  A230Th                       Lognormal                      m = 2.34
                                                                                      230
                                                                                          Th activity (Bq/kg) in fracture coating
                                                log10 A230Th  10                     /Sandström et al. 2008/
                                                              σ 10 = 0.62

  m238U                        Lognormal                     m = −5.39
                                                                                      238
                                                                                          U content of rock matrix (ppm)
                                                log10 m238U  10                      /Sandström and Stephens 2009/
                                                             σ 10 = 0.17

  β                            Log-uniform      min–max range = 0.1–0.9               Fracture coating fractional occupancy
                                                                                      (assumed range)

  δt                           Log-uniform      min–max range = 1×10–5–5×10–3         Fracture transport aperture (m)
                                                                                      (assumed range)

  RfA                          Log-uniform      min–max range = 1–104                 Fracture retardation factor
                                                                                      (assumed range)

  K Adm                        Lognormal
                                                        m 
                                                             m10 = −3.62              Rock matrix Kd (m3/kg) for Ra sorption
                                                log10 K dA                           recommended for use in SR-Site
                                                             σ
                                                            10 = 0.41




                  103




                  102




                  101




Activity (Bq/l)
                  100




                  10-1



                                                                                                            226
                                                                                                                  Ra
                  10-2
                                                                                                            222
                                                                                                                  Rn




                  10-3
                        10-2             10-1                100                101              102                   103

                                                                   tw (years)

 Figure B-1. Predicted steady-state activity of 226Ra and 222Rn in groundwater as a function of advective
 residence time (i.e. from the point of origin of infiltrating meteoric water to the groundwater sampling
 location). A limiting equilibrium condition is reached for residence times greater than a few tens of years
 as indicated by the horizontal broken reference lines.




  130                                                                                                                               R-10-48
                              104




Rn / 226Ra Activity Ratio
                              103




                              102
 222




                              101
                                10-2          10-1                   100                           101                         102              103

                                                                           tw (years)


Figure B-2. Predicted steady-state activity ratio of 222Rn/226Ra in groundwater as a function of advective
residence time (i.e. from the point of origin of infiltrating meteoric water to the groundwater sampling
location). A limiting equilibrium condition is reached for residence times greater than a few tens of years
as indicated by the horizontal broken reference line.


                              3.5
                                                                           -495
                                                                                                      -495

                                                                                                             -495                  -631
                                3


                                                                                 -139          -418           -418




log10 222Rn Activity (Bq/l)
                                               -541
                              2.5                                                                                -215

                                                                                            -435          -116
                                                                                                                     -116
                                                                                                                                   -764
                                                             -58
                                                                           -139             -303
                                2                     -58                                      -328
                                                                                      -46
                                                             -59            -28


                                                                                        -136
                              1.5                                   -40                            -299
                                                                                                              -623


                                                            -40                    -136                                            -969

                                1                                          -59
                                                                                                                            -969




                              0.5
                                 -2    -1.5           -1          -0.5            0                 0.5                 1                 1.5   2

                                                             log10 226Ra Activity (Bq/l)

Figure B-3. Cross-plot of measured activities (Bq/l) of 222Rn and 226Ra in groundwater at the Forsmark site.
Markers are coloured according to sampling elevation (masl) with shading darkening towards lower (i.e.
deeper) elevations. The actual sampling elevation is annotated in the figure for each data point.




R-10-48                                                                                                                                               131
Typical activities of 226Ra and 222Rn in Forsmark groundwater
There are a number of 226Ra and 222Rn measurements that were made in borehole sections during the
Forsmark site investigation /Laaksoharju et al. 2008/. These data are presented in Figure B-3 and
Figure B-4 as cross-plots of 222Rn versus 226Ra activity. Error bars are not shown on account their size
being typically smaller than the plot markers used to represent the data on a log-log scale. The relative
errors of the measurements are, however, roughly 4–6% based on radiometric counting statistics.
Generally, the lower Ca2+ concentrations correspond to shallower sampling depths as expected for
the site. This is more apparent if the Ca2+ concentration data are plotted directly against sampling
elevation as in Figure B-5. A plot of the 222Rn/226Ra activity ratio is shown in Figure B-6 and shows
very little correlation with depth. It is not known whether the waters sampled in these borehole sec-
tions are representative of sufficiently long advective travel times that equilibrium conditions can be
assumed. It is interesting to note, however, that the largest 222Rn/226Ra activity ratios are found in two
relatively deep borehole sections (KFM02A at –495 m and KFM08A at –541 m). Coupled with the
low 226Ra concentrations measured in these borehole sections, it appears likely that these represent
borehole sections featuring unusually strong sorption within fracture coatings.


                              3.5
                                                                           -1.60
                                                                                                    -1.59

                                                                                                            -1.65                      -1.42
                               3


                                                                              -1.53             -1.50         -1.51




log10 222Rn Activity (Bq/l)
                                             -1.17
                              2.5                                                                                  -1.55

                                                                                                           -1.67
                                                                                           -1.49                      -1.78            -0.84
                                                             -3.11
                                                                           -1.51           -1.42
                               2                 -3.12
                                                                                                -1.74
                                                                                       -1.93
                                                           -2.62           -1.90


                                                                                        -1.62
                              1.5                                  -2.43
                                                                                                   -1.50
                                                                                                             -1.27


                                                          -2.77                    -1.63                                               -0.99

                               1                                           -2.09
                                                                                                                               -1.00




                              0.5
                                 -2   -1.5           -1           -0.5             0                0.5                    1                   1.5   2

                                                             log10 226Ra Activity (Bq/l)

Figure B-4. Cross-plot of measured activities of 222Rn and 226Ra in groundwater at the Forsmark site.
Markers are coloured according to total Ca2+ concentration with shading darkening towards higher Ca2+
concentrations in the groundwater. The actual log10-transformed Ca2+ concentration (mol/l) is annotated
in the figure for each data point.




132                                                                                                                                                      R-10-48
                            10000




                            1000




Ca2+ (mg/l)


                             100




                              10
                               -1000    -900   -800   -700   -600    -500   -400    -300    -200    -100     0

                                                             Elevation (masl)

Figure B-5. Total dissolved Ca2+ concentration in sampled borehole sections at Forsmark plotted against
sampling elevation (masl).


                            10000




Rn / 226Ra Activity Ratio
                             1000




                              100
 222




                               10
                                -1000   -900   -800   -700    -600   -500    -400    -300    -200     -100       0

                                                             Elevation (masl)

Figure B-6. 222Rn/226Ra activity ratio in sampled borehole sections at Forsmark plotted against sampling
elevation (masl).




R-10-48                                                                                                              133
Expected equilibrium activities of 226Ra and 222Rn in Forsmark groundwater
The aqueous equilibrium activity of 222Rn and 226Ra in fracture water for the central best estimate
data are plotted in Figure B-7 (red circular marker) together with the measurement values from the
Forsmark site (blue shaded circular markers). The matrix equilibrium activities of the nuclides (cA(eq)
and cB(eq)) are indicated by the vertical and horizontal broken reference lines. Many of the variables and
parameters that influence the relative activities of these nuclides interact in a complex and non-linear
fashion which makes data interpretation difficult. In order to understand these interactions, deterministic
simulations were made whereby each of the most important (and least well constrained) variables
were individually varied while all other variables and parameters were held constant at their best
estimate values. This analysis allows us to understand the systematic effect of the different sources of
uncertainty and how they might impact upon predicted in situ activities of 222Rn and 226Ra. The results
are shown in Figure B-7 as coloured curves with arrows indicating the direction of increase for each of
the variables indicated by text annotations in the figure.


                               4




                              3.5        cB(eq)



                               3
                                                              RfA




log10 222Rn Activity (Bq/l)
                                                                                          ηp
                                                                                                 KdmA
                              2.5




                               2                                              δt



                              1.5




                               1


                                                                             cA(eq)
                              0.5
                                    -2     -1.5   -1   -0.5         0       0.5       1        1.5      2

                                                        log10 226Ra Activity (Bq/l)

Figure B-7. Simulated activity trends plotted together with measurement data from Forsmark boreholes.
The red circular marker indicates the expected equilibrium 222Rn and 226Ra activity for the central best
estimate parameters used previously to generate the curves in Figure B-1. The coloured trend lines indicate
the impact of varying the indicated parameters individually while all other parameters are held constant
(arrows showing the direction of relative increase). The vertical and horizontal broken lines indicate the
rock matrix equilibrium activities of each nuclide. Measurement data points are shaded according to
background Ca2+ as in Figure B-4.




134                                                                                                         R-10-48
The main conclusions that can be drawn from the variation analysis are:
•   ηp (recoil capture efficiency factor) affects the aqueous equilibrium activity of both nuclides
    in the rock matrix and therefore has a direct impact on the concentration driving force for
    out-diffusion from the rock matrix. Increasing ηp therefore results in a proportional increase
    in predicted 222Rn and 226Ra activity in fracture water all other things being equal. The orange
    coloured curve represents ηp varied in the range 0.01–0.1.
• K Adm (matrix sorptivity of Ra) influences the mobility of Ra in the rock matrix and thereby has a
  direct impact on the out-diffusion of 226Ra to the fracture water. 222Rn is produced both by decay
  of 226Ra within the rock matrix and in the fracture itself. Increasing K Adm therefore decreases the
  amount of 222Rn that can be produced by decay in the fracture, while production of 222Rn within
  the rock matrix remains undiminished. This explains the non-linear form of the red coloured
  curve representing K Adm varied in the range 10–5–10–1 m3/kg.
•   RfA (equilibrium retardation factor sorbed Ra in the fracture coatings) influences the amount of
    Ra dissolved in the fracture water while facilitating a higher overall Ra loading in the fracture
    owing to the retardation of advective transport. Increasing RfA gives increased production of 222Rn
    owing to the proportionally larger amounts of 226Ra accumulated in the fracture coatings under
    equilibrium conditions. There is a limit, however, to the amount of Ra that can be accumulated
    in the fracture coatings (owing to the finite amount of Ra that can be mobilised from the rock
    matrix) which gives a diminished impact on 222Rn production beyond a certain level. This explains
    the non-linear form of the green curve representing RfA varied in the range 1–104. In the absence
    of sorption on fracture coatings, the 226Ra activity in the fracture approaches the limit given by the
    rock matrix equilibrium activity as indicated by the asymptotic behaviour near the vertical broken
    line representing cA(eq).
•   δt (fracture transport aperture) has a strong impact on 222Rn activity in the fracture water owing to
    the interplay between out-diffusion from the rock matrix and relatively fast decay. This explains
    the non-linear form of the dark blue curve representing δt varied in the range 10 µm–5 mm. For
    very low transport apertures, the activity in the fracture approaches the limit determined by the
    rock matrix equilibrium activity as indicated by the asymptotic behaviour near the horizontal
    broken line representing cB(eq).
In a recent paper /Vinson et al. 2009/ suggest that the measured ratio of 222Rn/226Ra in groundwater is
proportional to the Kd value for Ra. This, however, is only strictly true deep within the rock matrix or in
the limit of very low transport aperture with weak or no sorption on fracture coatings (or alternatively,
very high matrix pore diffusivity as might be found in sedimentary rock). For realistic conditions at
the Forsmark site, the 222Rn/226Ra ratio cannot be interpreted simply in this fashion.
Since the governing variables partially offset or reinforce each other and generally interact in an
essentially non-linear fashion, it is very difficult to determine whether the independently measured
activities of natural tracers at Forsmark are consistent with ranges of Kd recommended for use in
SR-Site (i.e. for the purpose of modelling Ra transport from a repository for spent nuclear fuel). If
such a comparison were possible, this would be very valuable for corroboration of recommended Kd
data and a broad indication of the robustness of the extrapolation methods used in the present data
compilation.
In order to address this question, stochastic simulations were made using the uncertainty distribu-
tions specified in Table B-3. As demonstrated by the deterministic simulations shown in Figure B-7,
these variables are relatively poorly constrained considering the impact that they might have on
expected 222Rn and 226Ra activities. As a first step in this analysis, variables were assigned values
stochastically from their assumed uncertainty distributions with the exception of K Adm which was set
at different constant levels ranging from 10–4 m3/kg (weak sorption) to 10–1 m3/kg (strong sorption).
The intention of this was to gain an appreciation of the impact of radium matrix sorptivity while
simultaneously considering all other known uncertainties. The results of these simulations are shown in
Figure B-8 where the data are presented as a probability density for an ensemble of 105 realisations.
The probability density is represented as a smoothed 2D histogram with 100 equally spaced bins
along the principle axes of the figure.




R-10-48                                                                                                135
Figure B-8. Expected activities of 222Rn and 226Ra activities plotted together with measurement data from
Forsmark boreholes. The simulation data presented as probability densities with darker shading indicating
most likely data ranges (105 realisations) in the simulation ensemble. The figures show clockwise from a)
to d), the impact of increasingly strong sorption of Ra in the rock matrix. The measurement data points are
shaded according to background Ca2+ concentration as in previous figures.


In the second step, all variables were assigned values stochastically from their assumed uncertainty
distributions including K Adm which was assigned directly from the lognormal distribution recom-
mended for use in SR-Site. Figure B-9 shows the result of the ensemble simulations where all
known sources of uncertainty are considered simultaneously. From Figure B-8, it is clear that the
most appropriate value of K Adm giving best agreement with the measurement data lies somewhere
between 10–3 and 10–4 m3/kg. It is also interesting to note that the measurement data featuring with
the lowest 222Rn and 226Ra activities (bottom left hand quadrant of the measurement data cluster) are
also associated with the lowest background concentrations of Ca2+. This appears consistent with the
understanding of Ra(II) sorption which predicts greater ion-exchange sorptivity under increasingly
dilute conditions.
As can be seen from Figure B-9, the probability distribution of predicted 222Rn and 226Ra activities
agree relatively well with the measurement data when the SR-Site recommended Kd distribution
for Ra(II) is used in the simulations. In a probabilistic sense, the expected activity ranges for both
222
    Rn and 226Ra appear to be neither overestimated nor underestimated by a significant margin. On the
basis of this analysis, and assuming that the uncertainties of other governing variables are reasonably
assessed, we therefore conclude that the recommended Kd data for Ra(II) are both reasonable and
defensible for application in SR-Site.




136                                                                                                 R-10-48
          Strong sorpon (Rf ≈ 100) in fracture coang
                                                                                   10-5 m3/kg




                                                                      10-4 m3/kg



                                                          10-3.62 m3/kg



                                             10-3 m3/kg                   SR-Site best esmate
                              10-2 m3/kg

           10-1 m3/kg




                                                                               No sorpon in fracture coang




Figure B-9. Expected activity distributions of 222Rn and 226Ra activities plotted together with measurement
data from Forsmark boreholes. The simulation data are presented as a probability density with darker
shading indicating the most likely activity ranges (105 realisations) in the simulation ensemble. The red
curve designates the locus of best estimate activities for the specified Kd values (red markers). The SR-Site
best estimate is indicated in yellow shading. The measurement data points (blue circular markers) are
shaded according to background Ca2+ concentration as in previous figures.


Owing to natural variability in the fracture system, it appears unlikely that narrower uncertainty
estimates of transport aperture and fracture retardation are possible to achieve. On the other hand, the
uncertainty distribution for the recoil capture efficiency factor, ηp could be improved significantly by
measurement of radon out-diffusion from core samples of Forsmark site specific rocks. Although
the theoretical estimates of ηp given by /Neretnieks 2002/ agree with values cited by /Glynn and Voss
1999/ for groundwaters near the Äspö HRL (ηp in the approximate range 0.1–10%), it is noted that
measurements from other sites (e.g. /Przylibski 2000/) indicate that higher ηp values are sometimes
possible. If ηp for the Forsmark site specific rock types has been underestimated, this would neces-
sitate numerically larger K dm
                             A
                                values to accommodate the same fit with the measurement data. More
accurate empirical data for Forsmark rock types therefore has the potential to result in possibly
increased recommended Kd values for Ra.




R-10-48                                                                                                        137
                                                                                      Appendix C

Handling of literature data uncertainties
Since many of the literature data sets outlined in Table 3-6 are based upon relatively small sample
sizes, it was deemed necessary to develop specialised procedures to aid in the estimation of realistic
uncertainty bounds. As already noted in Section 3.2.4, this was achieved primarily through the use
of statistical resampling methods. This appendix provides a step-by-step account of the specific
procedures which have been used in these particular cases.
When data sets are comprised largely of replicate measurements representing a limited range of
experimental conditions, a small spread of Kd values is typically obtained which may not give a true
representation of the underlying data uncertainty. In many cases, the variance of the data set may
even be less than the error of individual estimates arising due to measurement uncertainties. For this
reason, the uncertainties of individual measurements have been formally propagated in the analysis
together with the additional uncertainties associated with the transfer factors used to extrapolate the
data to site-specific conditions.
In the Finnish literature data references /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993, 1995, Huitti et al. 1996, 1998,
Kulmala et al. 1996, 1998/, Rd data are given without error estimates and in some cases are reported
as “≥” relative to a specified value owing to issues relating to the upper limit of quantification. The
associated sorption percentages (S%), however, are given together with specified error estimates based
on radiometric counting statistics. The percentage sorbed is calculated by a radiometric mass balance
based on the initial and the final activity of the sorbing solute. Unlike the method used in the site
investigations (i.e. spiking with a radiolabeled stock solution), the radionuclide spikes in these cases
were prepared by evaporating an acidified solution of known activity to dryness onto Teflon strips
which were then placed with the rock-groundwater samples that had been pre-equilibrated for some
time. At the conclusion of the experiments, the remaining activity of the Teflon strips was measured
and the decay-compensated data used in a radiometric mass balance to estimate the percentage sorbed:
          Atracer − Ateflon       Asample
                              −
                V             Vsample
S (%) =                               ⋅100% 						(C-1)
               Atracer − Ateflon
                   V
Where,
Atracer = activity of the original dried Teflon platelet,
Ateflon = remaining activity on the Teflon platelet (i.e. undissolved),
Asample = activity of the sampled solution,
V       = total volume of the contact solution,
Vsample = volume of the sampled solution.
The Rd data are estimated in terms of the percentage sorbed, S(%) which is also calculated using a
mass balance:

          S (%)      V
Rd =                ⋅ 								(C-2)
       100 − S ( % ) m
The term V/m in Equation C-2 is the liquid to solid ratio (LS) in units suitable for estimating Rd in
the customary units of m3/kg. In general, the uncertainty in percentage sorbed has a highly non-linear
impact on the estimation of Rd. Since S(%) is confined to the interval 0%–100%, it is proper to assume
a Beta distributed uncertainty range for a specified mean and standard deviation of this variable.
An illustration of the non-linear relationship between Rd and S(%) is given in Figure C-1 under the
assumption of Beta-distributed S(%).
As can be readily appreciated from Figure C-1, the closer one gets to 100% sorption, the larger the
uncertainty of the estimated Rd value. This is a particular problem for strongly sorbing solutes when
the data are presented in this manner, since the percentage sorbed is typically very close to 100% in
the relevant pH range of interest thereby giving a large upper uncertainty bound for the Rd estimate.



R-10-48                                                                                             139
                       100

                                                                       S(%) = 99±1
                        90


                        80                          S(%) = 90±1


                        70




S(%), Percent sorbed
                                        S(%) = 70±1
                        60


                        50


                        40


                        30


                        20


                        10


                         0
                         0.001   0.01         0.1                  1                 10      100

                                                      Rd (m /kg)
                                                             3



  Figure C-1. Illustration of the relationship between percentage sorbed, S(%) and Rd (m3/kg) for various
  cases of S(%) specified as a mean and standard deviation and for a liquid to solid ratio of 10 ml/g. Rd
  prediction spans are given as the median and 95% confidence interval.


  There is, of course, an upper limit to S(%) that will always fall short of 100%. This is given by the
  method detection limit (MDL) for the analytical method used to quantify activity (or concentration)
  in the sampled contact solution. In most of the cases examined in this compilation, the MDL is not
  known or at least not specified in the particular reference. Although the literature data used in this
  compilation are generally considered to be of relatively high quality, the form of the reported values
  and the typically small number of replicates is not always ideal for making safety assessment recom-
  mendations.
  In order to obtain numerical ranges of Rd including uncertainty estimates suitable for application
  in safety assessment, a re-calculation procedure was adopted. This was based upon a Monte-Carlo
  approach whereby a large number of Beta-distributed random deviates were generated for each S(%)
  data point with specified uncertainty and then the corresponding Rd values were calculated with the
  aid of Equation C-2. In order to do this, the parameters of the Beta distribution, B (α, β) must be
  estimated. If S(%) is normalised to the interval S[0,1], the a and b parameters can be estimated using
  the following formulae /NIST 2010/:

         S (1 − S ) 
   α = S           − 1 								(C-3)
         σS
               2
                       
                   S (1 − S ) 
     β = (1 − S )            − 1 								(C-4)
                      σ 2
                         S       
  Figure C-2 shows a typical result obtained for two cases of a specified S(%) with a given uncertainty
  and an LS ratio of 10 ml/g which is common in the cited literature references. As can be seen from
  the Figure, the lower S(%) estimate of 90±1% gives a resulting Rd uncertainty distribution that is
  relatively narrow (–1.04±0.05) and well described by the lognormal distribution, whereas an S(%)
  estimate of 99±1% gives a broad (0.25±0.6), right skewed distribution that is not well modelled by
  the lognormal fit.




  140                                                                                               R-10-48
                      9                                                                                                  0.9
                                                                      Simulated Rd data                                                                                     Simulated Rd data
                      8    S(%) = 90±1                                lognormal fit
                                                                                                                         0.8        S(%) = 99±1                             lognormal fit
                           LS = 10                                                                                                  LS = 10
                      7                                                                                                  0.7




Probability Density                                                                               Probablility Density
                      6                                                                                                  0.6

                      5                                                                                                  0.5

                      4                                                                                                  0.4

                      3                                                                                                  0.3

                      2                                                                                                  0.2

                      1                                                                                                  0.1

                      0                                                                                                   0
                       -1.25    -1.2   -1.15   -1.1   -1.05   -1    -0.95     -0.9        -0.85                                -2    -1.5   -1   -0.5   0   0.5   1   1.5      2       2.5       3

                                           log10Rd (m3/kg)                                                                                         log10Rd (m3/kg)

  Figure C-2. Typical results obtained in Monte-Carlo re-calculation of Rd values based on sorption percent-
  ages specified with a given uncertainty and an LS ratio of 10 ml/g.


  After re-calculation of the individual Rd values and their uncertainty ranges, the raw data are then
  individually extrapolated to in situ conditions using the mechanical and CEC transfer factors (fm and
  fcec). Since the transfer factors themselves are uncertain, the estimated errors of the transfer factors
  are propagated formally in the calculations using Gauss error propagation rules and assuming no
  correlation between fm and fcec. The transfer factor corrections and the error calculations are carried
  out on the log-transformed Rd values. Although some of the individual data points featuring high
  sorptivity may have uncertainty distributions featuring significant right-hand skew (in log-space),
  the assumption of log-normality is considered reasonable since the propagation of uncertainties and
  aggregation of data tends to give rise to lognormal behaviour by way of the central limit theorem.
  In this compilation we have taken the view that the overall uncertainty of the ensemble of Kd estimates
  in a data set is best represented by assuming a convex combination of the underlying (assumed) log-
  normal uncertainties where equal weighting is given to each data point (i.e. a Gaussian mixture model
  for uncertainty aggregation in log space). This is achieved by random sampling of the individual Kd
  uncertainty distributions where the overall distribution is then obtained as the ensemble of resampled
  values. The best way to illustrate this is to demonstrate the procedure by way of an example. Table C-1
  shows a particular data set taken from /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/ which concerns sorption of Ra(II)
  on a porphyric granodiorite in contact with a natural sample of fresh groundwater. Although not atypi-
  cal, this data set is interesting in that it exhibits a number of features that illustrate the consequences
  of the various assumptions made in the extrapolation to in situ conditions which are relevant to the
  estimation of overall uncertainty.


  Table C-1. Example of a typical data set taken from a literature source (in this case sorption of
  Ra(II) on Kivetty porphyric granodiorite in contact with fresh groundwater /Kulmala and Hakanen
  1995/). The raw data Rd values are first re-calculated by Monte-Carlo to obtain their associated
  uncertainties under the assumption of Beta-distributed S(%). The transfer factors, fm and fcec
  and their estimated errors (2σ) are based on the BET surface area and CEC of the literature data
  samples relative to the Forsmark metagranite reference rock type. Extrapolated Kd values and
  their uncertainties are obtained by Gauss error propagation in log space.

  d    LS                          S(%)         log10 Rd           log10 fm                log10 fcec                           log10 Kd
  (mm) (ml/g)                                   (m3/kg)            (–)                     (–)                                  (m3/kg)

  < 0.1                     5      98.3±1.0 –0.459±0.285 –2.10±0.23                        –1.04±0.37 –3.59±0.52
  < 0.1                    10      99.2±0.1 0.097±0.055            –2.10±0.23              –1.04±0.37 –3.04±0.43
  < 0.1                    50      96.3±0.4 0.117±0.049            –2.10±0.23              –1.04±0.37 –3.02±0.43
  < 0.1                   100      94.8±0.7 0.265±0.062            –2.10±0.23              –1.04±0.37 –2.87±0.43
  < 0.1                   200      89.0±0.5 0.209±0.022            –2.10±0.23              –1.04±0.37 –2.93±0.43
  < 2.0                   10       93.5±0.2 –0.842±0.014 –1.06±0.23                        –1.04±0.37 –2.93±0.43




  R-10-48                                                                                                                                                                                       141
  Figure C-3 shows the re-calculated Rd data plotted in the form of probability density functions (PDF’s)
  for each of the six data points given in Table C-1. Also shown is the ensemble cumulative distribution
  based on a resampling of the underlying uncertainty distributions and best estimate PDF based on
  the mean and standard deviation of the resampled values. For comparison a “naive” PDF is shown
  which is based simply on the mean and standard deviation of the six central estimate values without
  additional consideration of the individual measurement uncertainties. There are several features in this
  data set that are interesting to note. Firstly, the apparent outlier in the case of the first narrow peak
  on the left-hand side of the figure represents the data point for the size fraction given as < 2.0 mm in
  Table C-1. The smaller Rd in this case reflects the smaller accessible sorptive surface area equilibrated
  in the 21 day contact time used in the experiments. It is not possible to say from the reported data
  whether this is due to diffusive disequilibrium or strictly a surface area scaling effect related to parti-
  cle size. In all likelihood the reduced Rd value represents a mix of these two confounding factors.
  A further feature of note is the apparent increase in Kd with increasing LS ratio. Although the differ-
  ences are for the most part relatively small, this is a typical behaviour in laboratory measurements
  referred to as the solids concentration effect /McKinley and Jenne 1991/. Different mechanisms have
  been proposed to explain this since theoretically for an ion exchange or surface complexation sorption
  mechanism, the Rd should be constant for a single binding site type, dilute radionuclide concentra-
  tion, and a constant contact solution composition. In some cases, drift in solution composition or
  co-precipitation processes might be responsible for this effect. In the present case, these explanations
  seem unlikely since Ra(II), being an ion-exchanger, is not strongly influenced (at least not directly) by
  pH or carbonate, nor does it seem likely that ion-exchange reactions should lead to a significant drift in
  the major cation composition of the contact solution. Solid solutions involving radiobarite can also be
  reasonably ruled out by consideration of the contact solution compositions with regard to barite equilib-
  rium. Although it is not possible to say with certainty what the true cause is, we prefer the explanation
  by /McKinley and Jenne 1991/ that explains the trend as a result of a number of different binding sites
  with different sorption affinities giving rise to Freundlich isotherm behaviour.


                       2.5                                                                               1

                                     Cumulative distribution (resampled data)


                        2                                                                                0.8

                                                                         PDF’s of individual




Normalised Frequency
                                                                            data points

                       1.5                                                                               0.6


                                      “Naive” PDF                                                              CDF
                                      (raw data average)
                        1                                                                                0.4


                                  PDF (resampled data)

                       0.5                                                                               0.2




                        0                                                                                0
                             -2          -1.5              -1           -0.5             0     0.5   1

                                                                log10Rd (m3/kg)

  Figure C-3. Estimated uncertainty distributions (PDF’s) for the individual Rd values prior to extrapolation
  (based on the data in Table C-1) together with the resampled cumulative ensemble distribution (CDF). Also
  shown is the “naive” PDF (broken red curve) based on the mean and standard deviation of the central values
  only and the best estimate PDF (broken blue curve) for the Rd data where the underlying uncertainties are
  included in the calculation.




  142                                                                                                                R-10-48
  A third feature of importance for the estimation of uncertainty is the very broad low peak, centred
  roughly at –0.46 in Figure C-3 (corresponding to the first data point in Table C-1). The importance of
  this data point becomes more obvious when the raw Rd values are extrapolated to site-specific condi-
  tions using fm and fcec. It should be noted that the CEC transfer factor, in particular, is very uncertain
  since the CEC of the site specific rock types is not known accurately and the CEC of the rock in the
  cited reference is assessed using a different analytical technique. Furthermore, the CEC of the larger
  particle size is also unknown and the value for the smaller size fraction must be used instead for this
  calculation. Figure C-4 shows the results of the extrapolation and resampling procedure.
  Although the formal error propagation gives relatively wide uncertainty estimates for the individual
  Kd values extrapolated to site-specific conditions, the spread of the extrapolated central estimates is
  very small. As can be seen from Figure C-4, the extrapolated and resampled uncertainty distribution
  is somewhat broader than the “naive” extrapolated distribution. Moreover, the statistical dispersion
  in the naive PDF can be shown to be largely due to a single outlying data point (the low peak centred
  at –0.46 in Figure C-3). What is interesting about this particular peak is that it appears to be a “fluke”
  since all the other data values, including that for the larger size fraction, are very tightly clustered.
  Perhaps, however, the tight clustering of the other data points is the fluke and in the event that the
  outlier had not been measured, the uncertainty would then have been underestimated by a large margin.
  The impact of this single data point can be illustrated by removing the outlier and recalculating the
  extrapolation as shown in Figure C-5.
  As can be seen in Figure C-5, removing the single outlying data point has a large impact on the
  statistical dispersion of the estimated uncertainty distribution. When the uncertainties associated with
  the individual measurement values and the transfer factors are propagated in the calculation, however,
  the resulting uncertainty distribution is much less sensitive to the existence or non-existence of
  individual data points. Although no individual data points are actually excluded in the data analysis
  for representative rock types presented in this compilation, this example does show the potential
  for underestimation of uncertainty ranges in small data sets if the underlying uncertainties are not
  handled properly in the data extrapolation procedure.


                        1                                                                                          1




                                         “Naive” PDF
                       0.8                                                                                         0.8
                                         (extrapolated)




Normalised Frequency
                       0.6                                                   Ensemble CDF                          0.6
                                                                             (extrapolated & resampled)

                                                                                                                         CDF
                                        Ensemble PDF
                                                                             PDF’s of individual data points
                                  (extrapolated & resampled)
                       0.4                                                   (extrapolated)                        0.4




                       0.2                                                                                         0.2




                        0                                                                                          0
                             -6         -5                -4         -3          -2              -1            0

                                                               log10Kd (m3/kg)

  Figure C-4. Estimated uncertainty distributions (PDF’s) for the individual Rd values after extrapolation
  where the various uncertainties are formally propagated in the calculation (based on the data in Table C-1)
  together with the resampled cumulative ensemble distribution (CDF). Also shown is the “naive” PDF (broken
  red curve) based on the mean and standard deviation of the corrected central values (without consideration
  of the underlying measurement or transfer factor uncertainties) and the best estimate PDF (broken blue curve)
  which is based on the extrapolated and resampled data with all uncertainties included in the calculation.


  R-10-48                                                                                                                      143
                       2.5                                                                                      1


                                      “Naive” PDF
                                      (extrapolated)
                        2                                                                                       0.8




Normalised Frequency
                       1.5                                                    Ensemble CDF                      0.6
                                                                              (extrapolated & resampled)


                                                                                                                      CDF
                                        Ensemble PDF
                                  (extrapolated & resampled)
                        1                                                 PDF’s of individual data points       0.4
                                                                          (extrapolated)



                       0.5                                                                                      0.2




                        0                                                                                       0
                             -6      -5                -4        -3             -2             -1           0

                                                            log10Kd (m3/kg)

  Figure C-5. Estimated uncertainty distributions as described previously in Figure C-4, although with the
  outlier data point removed resulting in a much narrower uncertainty range for the naive PDF (broken
  red curve). Although the Ensemble CDF and PDF have slightly reduced uncertainty ranges, the change is
  relatively minor since the underlying measurement and extrapolation uncertainties dominate the overall
  uncertainty.


  It was deemed that full propagation of data uncertainties in this manner was not necessary for the site
  specific data on account of the much larger data sets available implying a much smaller probability
  of fluke measurements significantly influencing the results. Another reason is that the transfer factors
  for site specific materials are considered to be more accurate than those calculated for literature
  data since the materials have been characterised using largely identical methods. Consequently, the
  uncertainty of the extrapolation is a smaller component of the overall data uncertainty and could
  be reasonably neglected for the site investigation data. Also, since the physical interpretation of the
  transfer factors themselves is subject to additional conceptual uncertainty it was thought that formal
  propagation of errors might lead to physically unrealistic uncertainty ranges with the concomitant
  possibility of risk dilution in stochastic simulations. Given that the uncertainty ranges in most cases
  already cover 2–4 orders of magnitude prior to propagation of underlying uncertainties, this was
  considered a reasonable judgement.
  In general, however, the increased uncertainty range obtained by full propagation of the underlying
  uncertainties only makes a minor contribution to the uncertainty ranges estimated for the site specific
  data. Figure C-6 shows the impact of neglecting underlying uncertainties for the calculation of the
  Kd uncertainty ranges for Ra(II) and Am(III) using the site specific data. In both cases, the increase
  in statistical dispersion is relatively small, although slightly larger for Ra(II) since this was a smaller
  data set than that for Am(III).
  The data for Ra(II) consist of 75 data points representing different size fractions, contact times, and
  replicate measurements for the Forsmark saline reference groundwater. Ra(II) was one of the solutes
  where ion-exchange modelling could be used to estimate a chemistry transfer factor, fchem to account
  for spatial variability and uncertainty in the application groundwater compositions. As well as the
  shift implied by the central value of fchem, the uncertainty distribution of the transfer factor introduces
  additional dispersion in the Kd range recommended for application groundwater conditions (3,000 y in
  the temperate domain). It should be noted that the uncertainty range for Ra(II) depicted in Figure C-6




  144                                                                                                                       R-10-48
                      1.4                                                                          0.6
                             Ra(II), Forsmark Saline GW                                                   Am(III), all GW types
                      1.2
                                                                                                   0.5




Probability Density                                                          Probability Density
                       1
                                                                                                   0.4
                      0.8
                                                                                                   0.3
                      0.6
                                                                                                   0.2
                      0.4

                      0.2                                                                          0.1

                       0                                                                            0
                        -5     -4.5    -4    -3.5    -3   -2.5   -2   -1.5                           -5       -4       -3         -2   -1   0   1
                                       log10Kd (m3/kg)                                                                 log10Kd (m3/kg)

  Figure C-6. Estimated uncertainty distributions for Ra(II) and Am(III) based on site specific data. The red
  curve shows the uncertainty distribution calculated without formal propagation of underlying measurement
  and transfer factor uncertainties. The blue curve shows the uncertainty distribution calculated with full
  propagation of uncertainties.


  is prior to convolution with the fchem transfer factor which results in a slightly expanded range for the
  uncertainty estimate. The data for Am(III), on the other hand, consists of 2,063 data points representing
  different size fractions, contact times, and replicate measurements for all groundwater compositions
  pooled together as an ensemble. In this case, the increase in statistical dispersion obtained by formally
  propagating the underlying uncertainties is negligible.




  R-10-48                                                                                                                                           145
                                                                                                              Appendix D

Kd data derivation sheet for trivalent actinides and lanthanides
Overview and evaluation of site investigation data
Site specific sorption data were obtained for Am(III) and Eu(III) during the site investigations at
Forsmark /Byegård et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/. These data are summarised in the
bedrock transport properties site descriptive model /Crawford 2008/ and are the basis for Kd values
recommended for use in SR-Site. Owing to the close geochemical analogy amongst the various trivalent
actinides and lanthanides, the experimental Rd data for both Am(III) and Eu(III) were pooled and
are assumed to be applicable to all solutes falling into this category. In most cases there is a time
dependency in the experimental data with a clear trend towards higher Rd values at increasing times.
The data also exhibit a relatively clear surface area dependency whereby smaller crushed particle
sizes are associated with larger sorptivities than larger particle size fractions. A typical time series
for Am(III) sorption on Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) is shown in Figure D-1.
Since the Rd value is quantified by way of a radiometric mass balance, any discrepancy in the activity
estimated for the blank sample (a triplicate measurement) relative to that of the rock-containing sample
has a direct impact on the estimated magnitude of sorption. This might be the reason for the slight
dip in Rd at a contact time of 92 days as can be seen for all three size fractions in Figure D-1.
If the apparent time dependency were to be interpreted as a diffusive disequilibrium process, the
lack of tendency to plateau to a constant value would normally suggest that none of the particle size
fractions have reached diffusive equilibrium for the range of contact times investigated. The relatively
even vertical spacing of the data sets in log-log space, however, is not fully consistent with a simplified
model of particle diffusion where sorption also occurs on external surfaces of the crushed particles.
Since smaller crushed size fractions are expected to have a greater proportion of external surface
area relative to that of their internal microporosity, the slope of the diffusive uptake curve would be
expected to be steeper for larger particle size fractions. This is because smaller particle sizes, having a
larger proportion of external surface area, are proportionally less affected by diffusive disequilibrium
involving internally accessible surfaces.


                1
                         Am(III), Fresh (mean of triplicate samples)




               0.1




Rd (m3/kg)



              0.01


                                                                            1-2 mm size fraction

                                                                            0.25-0.5 mm size fraction

                                                                            0.063-0.125 mm size fraction

             0.001
                     1                              10                       100                           1000

                                                           contact time (days)

Figure D-1. Typical time series for Am(III) sorption Rd (m3/kg) measured in the Forsmark site investigation
laboratory studies. There is a clear sorption dependency on both particle size and time. The slight dip in Rd
at the second last sampling time relates to the radiometric mass balance method used to quantify sorption
using blank samples (see text for explanation).


R-10-48                                                                                                              147
The relative slopes of the time series curves for different size fractions are also difficult to reconcile
with a bimodal diffusion process where sorption occurs primarily in association with an accessory
mineral such as biotite. If this were the case, there would not be such a large effect of surface area
since the average biotite content of the rock should be roughly the same in all size fractions (even
allowing for minor differences in biotite enrichment in different grain sizes). It is also noted that
owing to the large hydrated radius of trivalent actinides and lanthanides, inter-lamellar diffusion into
individual biotite grains does not seem a particularly plausible scenario and any association with
biotite would therefore be mostly restricted to frayed edge sites (FES).
In /Kienzler et al. 2009/ sorptive uptake of Am was studied on core sample monoliths obtained from
the Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory (HRL). In the resulting analysis of autoradiograph data combined
with SEM-EDX mapping of iron content, it was found that Am sorbed inhomogenously on all mineral
surfaces with no correlation with regard to Fe content (Fe being a proxy marker for biotite and horn-
blende content of granitic rocks). In much earlier autoradiographic studies by /Allard et al. 1985/,
as well as /Ittner et al. 1988/ and /Beall et al. 1980/ sorption was observed to occur on all exposed
surfaces although more strongly on biotite. In /Anderson et al. 2007/, on the other hand, autoradio-
graphs of Am sorption on monolithic samples of Siberian granitoids gave indications of diffusive
uptake of Am into biotite crystals. No specific details of this are given in the reference and the author
of the present report interprets this to mean diffusion into cleavage microcracks rather than true
interlayer diffusion. Although some of the literature appears to suggest (although not unequivocally)
sorptive association with biotite, there is essentially no direct spectroscopic evidence for replacement
of interlayer K+ ions in biotite with Am3+ or any of its analogue elements used in experiments.
An attempt was made to model the data using a single rate diffusion model with sorption on external
and internal particle surfaces. In the model there are a number of uncertain parameters that need to
be estimated. Apart from the Kd value for sorption, other parameters that need to be assessed include
the effective diffusivity of the crushed rock particles and the specific sorptive surface area of the rock
separated into contributions from an internal and external surface area component. The surface area
of the crushed rock could be estimated from BET surface area measurements carried out on duplicate
samples of two different size fractions (0.063–0.125 mm and 2–4 mm). Linear regression of the
BET surfaces areas allows an estimate of the contributions by internal and external surfaces to be
approximately characterised (see, for example, /André et al. 2008b/). Since the particle size fractions
used in the sorption experiments were sometimes different from the particle sizes used in the BET
measurements, the regression equation was used to interpolate the appropriate surface area for the
calculation. The effective diffusivity of crushed particles is unknown although for the purposes of
making these calculations an uncertainty distribution was assumed based on a lognormal distribution
with subjectively assessed 95% confidence bounds corresponding to 10–12–10–15 m2/s. This is slightly
larger than the uncertainty interval considered appropriate for intact rock samples, although reflects
the fact that individual particles could feature smaller or larger diffusivities than monolithic samples
owing to the upscaling effect of larger sample sizes.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure D-2 where Kd is treated as a fitting parameter
while sorptive surface area and effective diffusivity are assigned from their associated uncertainty
distributions in a stochastic fashion. The stochastic nature of the simulation allows uncertainties in
the underlying parameter set to be propagated forward in the assessment of a probabilistic range of
likely Kd values for the rock.
Apart from the fact that the modelled uptake curves do not match the measurement data very well, an
interesting outcome of the simulations is that the resulting best estimate Kd distribution has a larger
range of uncertainty than the original empirical Rd data set to which the model is fitted. This is largely
due to the propagated effect of uncertain effective diffusivity and internal/external surface area which
inflates the uncertainty of the Kd estimate considerably. When diffusive disequilibrium is considered
there is the possibility that the measured Rd value is less than the true Kd value for the rock as indicated
by the blue coloured bars on the right hand side of the figure. When only surface area effects are con-
sidered, however, the measured Rd value generally over-predicts the Kd value owing to the increased
external surface area of crushed rock relative to the surface area of its internal porosity.




148                                                                                                 R-10-48
             100




             10-1




Rd (m3/kg)



             10-2




                          F / Trivalent Ln-Ac(III) / Am / 30-103 / 1.000 mm - 2.000 mm


             10-3
                   10-1                  100                  101                 102    103   104

                                                              contact time (days)

Figure D-2. Monte-Carlo simulation results assuming a single rate diffusion model with effective diffusivi-
ties and sorptive surfaces areas assigned stochastically from their associated uncertainty distributions.
The swarm of light blue curves underlying the experimental data points (dark blue markers) represent
curves for 1,000 realisa­tions where Kd is the fitting parameter. The blue coloured bars on the right-hand
side are a plot of 100 randomly selected best fit Kd values taken from the simulations, while the orange
coloured bars are the corresponding best fit Kd values where diffusion is neglected and only surface area
effects are modelled.


As already discussed in Chapter 5, a pH drift of as much as 1.5 pH units was observed in a number
of control samples over the course of the 180 day sorption experiments. For solutes that sorb by way
of a surface complexation mechanism, this can have a considerable impact upon results since the Kd
value can easily be altered by an order of magnitude or more in response to such a pH change. In
attempting to interpret the data we therefore are faced with the possibility that the time dependency
observed in the data set is related to some process other than simple diffusive disequilibrium (chemical
kinetics are not considered on account of the very long equilibration time).
The crushed rock samples had been pre-equilibrated with synthetic groundwater for a period of
89 days (with 10 water changes during the first 36 days) prior to spiking with the radionuclide tracer.
The long pre-equilibration time would possibly disqualify proton exchange since such processes would
be expected to reach equilibrium much more quickly. Chemical weathering reactions involving the
rock samples is a distinct possibility since the crushing procedure exposes new mineral surfaces that
might react slowly and release cations. If the glove box in which the samples were stored was not
sufficiently oxygen free, then the slow release of Fe(II) from biotite combined with the possible
formation of ferric oxyhydroxide microprecipitates could have a strong impact on the magnitude of
the observed sorption owing to the strong sorption typically associated with such minerals. Increases
of BET surface area by as much as a factor of three, for example, have been measured by e.g. /Huitti
et al. 1996/ on crushed granite equilibrated with groundwater for 3 weeks. This could be related to
weathering or precipitation of secondary minerals and the increase of surface area would also imply
a positive pH drift owing to proton exchange reactions involving the newly created surfaces (all
other things being equal).




R-10-48                                                                                                 149
Scoping calculations were made using PHREEQC and the surface complexation model for Am described
in /Baston et al. 1995/ as reported in the RES3T database1 /Brendler et al. 2003/. The surface complexation
reaction is based upon a ternary reaction involving Am3+ and two carbonate molecules with a strong
surface site of ferrihydrite therefore also implying a strong dependency on carbonate concentration. For
the very low radionuclide concentrations used in the experiments, precipitation of about a microgram
of ferrihydrite (or 0.3 mg/l) appears to be sufficient to boost the apparent Kd value by roughly the same
amount observed in the laboratory experiments. This, however, is equivalent to 350–400 times the
initial total concentration of Fe specified for the groundwater used in the experiment and therefore
this particular explanation may not be realistic.
Although the release of Fe2+ and its subsequent oxidation can lead to the formation of ferric oxy­
hydroxides, this process should not have a significant net effect on pH owing to pH-buffering related
to the precipitation process. The source of the pH increase therefore could instead be related to the
release of other cations or the re-equilibration of solution carbonate concentrations to a lower carbon
dioxide partial pressure (pCO2) in the glove box. Either of these processes could give rise to the
observed change in pH and influence the sorption of Am.
If the time dependency originates in a diffusive disequilibrium process, then data for the largest size
fraction and longest contact time would be the most appropriate to use in making Kd recommendations
since this would minimise the impact of both surface area effects and diffusive disequilibrium. If, on
the other hand, drift in pH and pCO2 or the formation of secondary minerals is the source of the time
dependency, a good argument can be made for the selection of data for smallest size fraction and
shortest contact time.
Since it is unclear which process or combination of processes gives rise to the time dependency of
the measured Rd values, a decision was taken to consider the data set in its entirety and not to filter
out values on the basis of particle size or contact time. Although the trend in individual data series
is generally towards greater Rd values with increasing time, the trend of the aggregate data set is
relatively small and tends to be overshadowed by differences arising due to the surface area of different
size fractions. The choice to make corrections for the increased surface area of the crushed size
fractions while neglecting time dependent effects of unclear origin therefore appears to be cautious
for the purposes of safety assessment calculations.


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
The procedure for derivation of Kd values relevant for application within SR-Site consisted of the
following steps:
1. The Rd data for each groundwater type, taken separately, was pooled without any additional
   filtering by rock type, contact time, or particle size.
2. A normalising surface area transfer factor (fA) was first used to convert the raw Rd data for differ-
   ent particle size fractions to R 0d values corresponding to the reference crushed rock size fraction
   (2–4 mm) using Equation 5-6.
3. A mechanical damage transfer factor (fm) was then used to account for the difference in surface
   area between the reference size fraction of crushed rock and that of monolithic samples deemed
   to be approximately representative of the in situ rock. This transfer factor was calculated using
   Equation 5-7 and allows K 0d to be calculated. The transfer factor was applied assuming the
   geometric mean value as the central value. Only the central value of the fm distribution was
   propagated in the subsequent calculations. Sample-specific fm values were calculated individually
   for the same borehole sampling intervals as the samples used in the sorption experiments.




1
 RES³T (Rossendorf Expert System for Surface and Sorption Thermodynamics), http://www.fzd.de/db/RES3T.
login (accessed 2010-04-01)


150                                                                                                R-10-48
 The cation exchange capacity (CEC) transfer factor, fcec was neglected on the basis that Am is not
 thought to sorb preferentially in association with bitotite (e.g. /Kienzler et al. 2009/). Since there are
 no thermodynamic or empirical models of acceptable accuracy which could be used to describe Am
 sorption on granitic rock, all uncertainty relating to variable or uncertain groundwater composition is
 assumed to be internalised in the aggregate data set combining Kd data for all groundwater composi-
 tions. Estimated K 0d data corrected for surface area and mechanical damage effects are plotted in
 Figure D-3 assuming Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type
 for the Forsmark site.


 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 If it is assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to variable groundwater composition are
 internalised in the individual data sets shown in Figure D-3, a recommended range for application in
 SR-Site can be defined by aggregating these into a global data set. The relevant Kd range for applica-
 tion in SR-Site is given in Figure D-4.


                1
                          Brine (Fm SDM)

               0.9        Brine (Lx SDM)

                          Fresh (Fm SDM)
               0.8        Fresh (Lx SDM)

                          Marine (Fm SDM)
               0.7
                          Marine (Lx SDM)




CDF (% rank)
                          Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)
               0.6
                          Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)
                          Type V (Lx SDM)
               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-05       1.00E-04         1.00E-03      1.00E-02   1.00E-01   1.00E+00

                                                      Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure D-3. Corrected Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Am(III)/Eu(III) sorption based on raw Rd data
 for site-specific rock types and groundwater compositions as reported in the Forsmark (Fm SDM) and
 Laxemar (Lx SDM) site investigations. Only surface area and mechanical damage transfer factors (fA and
 fm) have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed
 appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented
 as an empirical cumulative distribution function (CDF).




 R-10-48                                                                                               151
                1
                          Aggregate data set (all groundwater compositions)

               0.9        lognormal fit to data


               0.8

               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6

               0.5
                                                                     log10Kd = -1.83±0.72
               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1

                0
               1.00E-04         1.00E-03             1.00E-02              1.00E-01         1.00E+00   1.00E+01

                                                              Kd (m /kg)
                                                                       3



 Figure D-4. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) data for Am(III) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations for
 Forsmark. The data range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes
 Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the
 lognormal distribution fit to the data are indicated in the figure.




 152                                                                                                              R-10-48
                                                                                             Appendix E

Kd data derivation sheet for cesium (Cs)
Overview and evaluation of site investigation data
Site specific sorption data were obtained for Cs(I) during the site investigations at Forsmark /Byegård
et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/. These data are summarised in the bedrock transport
properties site descriptive model /Crawford 2008/ and are the basis for Kd values recommended for
use in SR-Site. In most cases (although there are some exceptions) there is a time dependency in
the experimental data with a clear trend towards higher Rd values at increasing times. The data also
exhibit a relatively clear surface area dependency whereby smaller crushed particle sizes are associated
with higher sorptivities than larger size fractions. A typical time series for Cs(I) sorption on Forsmark
metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) is shown in Figure E-1.
It is interesting to note the inflection in the slope of the temporal trend at 92 days as shown in
Figure E-1. This is at the same location as the dip noticed in the corresponding data set for Am(III)
shown in Figure D-1. As discussed previously in the case of Am(III) sorption, if the apparent time
dependency were to be interpreted as a diffusive disequilibrium process, the lack of tendency to
plateau to a constant value would normally suggest that none of the particle size fractions have
reached diffusive equilibrium for the range of contact times investigated. The relatively even vertical
spacing of the data sets in log-log space, however, is not fully consistent with a simplified model of
particle diffusion where sorption also occurs on external surfaces of the crushed particles.
As described previously for Am(III) sorption on site-specific materials, the relative slopes of the time
series curves for different size fractions seems difficult to reconcile with a bimodal model of diffusive
uptake since smaller surface area effects would be expected. In this case, however, Cs+ is expected to
displace interlayer K+ ions in biotite. If access to individual biotite grains or grain clusters in the larger
size fractions is hindered by way of a lower connected porosity this could potentially account for
some of the observed difference if the diffusive uptake into biotite interlayers is considered to be rate
limiting.


                1
                         Cs(I), Saline_Fm (mean of triplicate samples)

                                   1-2 mm size fraction

                                   0.25-0.5 mm size fraction

                                   0.063-0.125 mm size fraction


               0.1




Rd (m3/kg)



              0.01




             0.001

                     1                               10                         100   1000

                                                          contact time (days)

Figure E-1. Typical time series for Cs(I) sorption Rd (m3/kg) measured in the Forsmark site investigation
studies. There is a clear sorption dependency on both particle size and time.



R-10-48                                                                                                   153
Although sequestration of Cs(I) on the frayed edge sites and internal surfaces of biotite grains is well
described in the literature and confirmed by direct spectroscopic evidence (e.g. /Bostick et al. 2002,
Zachara et al. 2002, McKinley et al. 2004/), it is not possible to fit a simple diffusion and sorption
model to account for diffusive disequilibrium without introducing additional uncertainties. As indicated
previously for Am(III) sorption this gives rise to overall ranges of data uncertainty that are larger
than the span of the raw data and therefore might not be cautious for application in safety assessment
calculations. For this reason, the data for Cs(I) sorption have been treated by considering the data set in
its entirety and not filtering values on the basis of crushed size fraction or contact time. As noted previ-
ously for Am(III), although the trend in individual data series is generally towards greater Rd values
with increasing time, the trend of the aggregate data set is small relative to the overall data variability.


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
The procedure for derivation of Cs(I) Kd values relevant for application within SR-Site consisted of
the following steps:
1. The Rd data for each groundwater type, taken separately, was pooled without any additional
   filtering by rock type, contact time, or particle size.
2. A normalising surface area transfer factor (fA) was first used to convert the raw Rd data for different
   particle size fractions to R 0d values corresponding to the reference crushed rock size fraction
   (2–4 mm) using Equation 5-6.
3. A mechanical damage transfer factor (fm) was then used to account for the difference in surface
   area between the reference size fraction of crushed rock and that of monolithic samples deemed
   to be approximately representative of the in situ rock. This transfer factor was calculated using
   Equation 5-7 and applied assuming the geometric mean as the central value. Only the central
   value of the fm distribution was propagated in the subsequent calculations. Sample-specific fm
   values were calculated individually for the same borehole sampling intervals as the samples
   used in the sorption experiments.
4. A cation exchange capacity (CEC) transfer factor, fcec was used to account for differences between
   the CEC of site specific rock at Forsmark and the rock used in the laboratory experiments which
   includes samples taken from Laxemar with different CEC. The transfer factor was calculated
   using Equation 5-8 and applied assuming the geometric mean as the central value. The same
   transfer factor was for all samples used in the sorption experiments since CEC estimates were
   not available on sample by sample basis. Only the central value of the fcec distribution was
   propagated in the subsequent calculations.
5. A groundwater chemistry transfer factor, fchem was used to account for differences in the major
   ion composition of the groundwater used in experiments and those projected for application
   conditions. A distribution of fchem values was estimated using the ion-exchange model described
   in Section 5.1.1 and applied by stochastically combining estimated values of fchem with randomly
   selected values from the K 0d probability distribution estimated for Forsmark saline groundwater
   (this Monte-Carlo sampling procedure is equivalent to convolution of the individual probability
   density functions).
Estimated K 0d data corrected for surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC effects
using Equation 5-2 are plotted in Figure E-2 assuming Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057)
as a representative rock type for the Forsmark site.
The theoretical Kd was calculated using PHREEQC and the SKB-TDB /Duro et al. 2006/ for 10,000
randomly selected groundwater compositions taken from the SR-Site temperate domain simulations
/Salas et al. 2010/. The ion-exchange model described in Section 5.1.1 was used assuming selectivity
coefficients for Äspö diorite as a basis for calculations. Comparison of Kd values calculated in this
manner with the corresponding theoretical result for the Forsmark saline reference water allows
the groundwater chemistry transfer factor, fchem to be calculated in straight-forward fashion for the
projected application conditions using Equation 5-9. Since the data are normalised in the calculation,
fchem is relatively insensitive to the uncertain CEC of the simulated rock-water system for a single
site ion-exchange model provided the differences are not so great that significantly perturbed
groundwater compositions would result.



154                                                                                                 R-10-48
                1

                          Brine (Fm SDM)
               0.9
                          Brine (Lx SDM)

               0.8        Fresh (Fm SDM)

                          Fresh (Lx SDM)
               0.7        Marine (Fm SDM)

                          Marine (Lx SDM)
               0.6




CDF (% rank)
                          Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)

                          Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)
               0.5
                          Type V (Lx SDM)

               0.4        minimum effective Kd



               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-07   1.00E-06          1.00E-05   1.00E-04      1.00E-03   1.00E-02   1.00E-01

                                                       Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure E-2. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Cs(I) sorption based on raw Rd data for site-specific rock
 types and groundwater compositions as reported in the Forsmark (Fm SDM) and Laxemar (Lx SDM) site
 investigations. Surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fA, fm, and
 fcec) have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed
 appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented
 as an empirical cumulative distribution function. A minimum effective Kd reference line is plotted in the
 figure indicating the upper 95% confidence limit for the matrix storage capacity of the rock based on water
 saturation porosity.


 In the SR-Site groundwater simulations, only the major ions are specified. For the purpose of simulating
 ion-exchange processes involving trace components not included in these simulations, the concentrations
 of these constituents need to be estimated. This was achieved by constructing correlations between
 groundwater components using the hydrochemical data available from the site investigations
 /Laaksoharju et al. 2008, 2009/ as a basis and using these correlations to estimate the likely concentra-
 tions of tracer components under application conditions. It was generally the case that Ca concentration
 was the best predictor of the trace components Cs, Sr, Rb, and Ba. Full details concerning how these
 correlations were established and implemented can be found in Appendix A.
 Simulation results for the central case selectivity coefficients are given in Figure E-3 and indicate a
 slightly decreased Kd at early times relative to the reference groundwater. At longer times, however,
 the progressive freshening of the groundwater due to intrusion of a meteoric component gives
 elevated Kd values relative to the reference groundwater.
 Additional simulations were carried out to quantify the impact of uncertainty in the selectivity
 coefficients using the 2σ error estimates specified in Table 5-5 as a calculation basis and assuming
 lognormally distributed uncertainties. Since changing the selectivity coefficient influences the
 theoretical Kd value for both the randomly sampled SR-Site groundwater and for the reference
 groundwater, it was necessary to perform paired simulations. For the 10,000 randomly sampled
 groundwater compositions, an additional 10,000 simulations were required to establish the reference
 state for each perturbed set of selectivity coefficients. The results of this analysis are shown in
 Figure E-4 and indicate a relatively small impact of aleatory uncertainty.




 R-10-48                                                                                                155
                1


              0.8


              0.6

                                                    9000 y
              0.4


              0.2
                                                                           3000 y

log10 fchem     0


              -0.2                               5000 y


              -0.4                                                              2000 y


              -0.6


              -0.8


               -1
                     -2   -1.8   -1.6   -1.4       -1.2      -1   -0.8   -0.6       -0.4   -0.2   0

                                               log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

 Figure E-3. Chemistry transfer factors, fchem calculated for Cs(I) sorption at application groundwater
 conditions in the SR-Site temperate case. The plotted data represent 10,000 randomly selected groundwater
 compositions calculated individually using PHREEQC and the assumed ion exchange model (central case
 selectivity coefficients). Data are given for 2,000 y (lime green markers), 3,000 y (dark green), 5,000 y
 (blue), 9,000 y (red). The cross-hairs in the figure represent the relative location of the reference saline
 groundwater for Forsmark.


 Using the calculated fchem distribution, it is possible to estimate Kd values appropriate for application
 groundwater compositions by convolution of the individual probability density functions or by using
 an equivalent stochastic method. The latter method, being simpler to implement numerically, was
 chosen and used to estimate the Kd values presented in this compilation. The stochastic method
 was based upon random sampling (105 samples) of the individual probability density functions and
 multiplication of the individually sampled values using Equation 5-3. The resulting distributions of
 Kd values are plotted in Figure E-5 to Figure E-8 for different times during the temperate calcula-
 tion cases and include the additional impact of stochastically perturbed selectivity coefficients as
 described above.
 Although only the K 0d data set for the reference Forsmark saline groundwater was used to extrapolate
 to application conditions, the plotted results of the calculations indicate a generally very good agree-
 ment with the K 0d values for groundwaters that were not used in the calculations. The assumption
 of the simplified, single-site ion-exchange model and selectivity coefficients derived for the Äspö
 diorite rock therefore appears to give an acceptably low level of uncertainty with regard to Cs(I)
 sorption for the purposes of SR-Site safety assessment calculations.




 156                                                                                                   R-10-48
                      1


                    0.8


                    0.6
                                                                         9000 y

                    0.4

                                                                                                          3000 y
                    0.2



log10 fchem
                      0


                   -0.2
                                                             5000 y

                   -0.4
                                                                                                             2000 y

                   -0.6


                   -0.8


                     -1
                          -2    -1.8        -1.6      -1.4        -1.2          -1   -0.8          -0.6       -0.4         -0.2         0

                                                         log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure E-4. Chemistry transfer factors, fchem calculated for Cs(I) sorption at application groundwater
conditions in the SR-Site temperate case. The plotted data represent 10,000 randomly selected groundwater
compositions calculated individually using PHREEQC and the assumed ion exchange model. The plotted
data include the additional effect of random perturbation of selectivity coefficients conforming to their
error estimates. Data are given for 2,000 y (lime green markers), 3,000 y (dark green), 5,000 y (blue),
9,000 y (red). The cross-hairs in the figure represent the relative location of the reference groundwater.


                    -1


                   -1.5
                               Fresh

                    -2
                                                               Type V
                                                                                                              Saline (Lx)

                   -2.5


                    -3




 log10Kd (m3/kg)
                   -3.5


                    -4                  Saline (Fm)


                   -4.5                            Marine


                    -5                                                                                                 Brine


                   -5.5


                    -6
                      -2.5             -2              -1.5                -1               -0.5                   0              0.5
                                                       log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure E-5. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Cs(I) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 2,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.



R-10-48                                                                                                                                     157
                   -1


                  -1.5
                             Fresh

                   -2
                                                                Type V
                                                                                            Saline (Lx)

                  -2.5




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                   -3


                  -3.5


                   -4                 Saline (Fm)


                  -4.5                            Marine


                   -5                                                                                 Brine


                  -5.5


                   -6
                    -2.5             -2                 -1.5             -1    -0.5           0               0.5

                                                        log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure E-6. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Cs(I) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 3,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


                    -1


                  -1.5                                                                   Type V
                             Fresh

                    -2
                                                                                             Saline (Lx)

                  -2.5




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                    -3


                  -3.5


                    -4                    Saline (Fm)


                  -4.5                             Marine


                    -5                                                                                Brine


                  -5.5


                    -6
                      -2.5           -2                  -1.5            -1     -0.5              0           0.5

                                                         log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure E-7. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Cs(I) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 5,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


158                                                                                                                 R-10-48
                  0




                                                                         Type V
                  -1

                          Fresh

                                                                                     Saline (Lx)
                  -2




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                  -3




                  -4
                                       Saline (Fm)



                                                Marine
                  -5                                                                       Brine




                  -6
                   -2.5           -2                 -1.5         -1          -0.5     0           0.5

                                                     log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure E-8. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Cs(I) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 9,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
Based on the ion-exchange simulations described in the previous section, the following Kd ranges
are recommended for use at different times in the hydrogeochemical evolution of the repository
environment:
log10 Kd ≈ –3.44±0.51                      (t = 2,000 y)						                                           (E-1)
log10 Kd ≈ –3.46±0.51                      (t = 3,000 y)						                                           (E-2)
log10 Kd ≈ –3.38±0.51                      (t = 5,000 y)						                                           (E-3)
log10 Kd ≈ –3.10±0.62                      (t = 9,000 y)						                                           (E-4)
As can be seen from the recommended data, the changing salinity of the repository environment has
only a weak impact on the Kd uncertainty distribution, with a tendency to towards slightly higher
sorptivities with time. Since it is not possible to consider temporally variable Kd values in safety
assessment calculations, the time period giving the lowest Kd value is recommended to be used
for calculations. This corresponds to the groundwater conditions existing at 3,000 y. Generally the
numerically calculated Kd uncertainties were found to be lognormally distributed with the exception
of 9,000 y where the fitted lognormal distribution doesn’t fully capture the positive skew of the data
set (see Figure E-9).




R-10-48                                                                                                          159
                       1


                      0.9


                      0.8
                                          t = 5000 y

                      0.7




Probability Density
                      0.6


                      0.5

                                                                                t = 9000 y
                      0.4


                      0.3


                      0.2


                      0.1


                       0
                       -5.5   -5   -4.5        -4       -3.5     -3      -2.5      -2        -1.5   -1

                                                       log10Kd (m3/kg)

  Figure E-9. Comparison of Kd (m3/kg) distributions predicted for Cs(I) at 5,000 y and 9,000 y. The data
  are plotted in histogram form with a fitted lognormal distribution in each case. The data set for 9,000 y
  exhibits a slight positive skew relative to the lognormal fit.




  160                                                                                                    R-10-48
                                                                                        Appendix F

Kd data derivation sheet for lead (Pb)
Overview and evaluation of available literature data
The sorption of Pb on granitic rock is poorly covered in the literature and only one study /Papelis
2001/ has been found where sorption has been characterised using relevant materials and water
compositions. In the reported experiments, pH dependent sorption edges were measured on finely
crushed Shoal granite (≤ 0.075 mm) in contact with water of variable ionic strength (0.01, 0.1, and
1.0 M NaNO3) and for a range of Pb(II) concentrations (10–7, 10–5, 10–4 M). The liquid to solid ratio
used in the experiments was 100 ml/g. In addition, the sorption was measured for three different
synthetic groundwaters reflecting groundwater compositions of three different wells at the site.
The actual composition of the groundwaters is not well documented in the reference although the
HC-4 groundwater type is described as being composed of approximately equal concentrations
of calcium and sodium cations (~65 mg/l) and roughly equal concentrations of chloride, sulphate,
and bicarbonate anions (~100 mg/l). Although Freundlich isotherm parameters were derived for
the Pb(II) sorption, the concentrations used were several orders of magnitude higher than what is
expected for transport of Pb(II) in the repository environment. For this reason, only the Kd values
estimated for a Pb(II) concentration of 10–7 M are used in this report.
The pH of the synthetic waters was adjusted by adding small amounts of 1 M HNO3 or 0.1 M NaOH
prior to the commencement of the experiments. Although the pH at the conclusion of the experiments
was not measured, it is reasonable to expect only a small drift in pH on account of the relatively high
liquid to solid ratio used in the experiments.
Additional experiments were also carried out on a high ionic strength (0.63 M) synthetic groundwater,
H-2 (presented only as a pH adsorption edge graphic in the reference). These experiments indicated
that there was essentially no quantifiable ionic strength dependency for the sorption of Pb at pH ³ 6 for
the comparison between HC-4 and H-2. Other experimental, sorption edge data for ionic strengths of
0.1 M and 1.0 M (NaNO3 background electrolyte) are not presented as numerical tables in the reference
although they are given instead in graphical form. These results appear to exhibit no quantifiable differ-
ence in sorptivity for the range of ionic strengths investigated. This was interpreted by /Papelis 2001/ as
an indication of strong binding by way of inner sphere surface complexation.


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
The Rd data corresponding to groundwater HC-4 were chosen as being the most relevant data set for
extrapolation to site specific conditions at Forsmark. The BET surface area of the crushed rock was
determined by /Papelis 2001/ to be approximately 0.79 m2/g. Since only one particle size was used
in the experiments, it was only necessary to use a single correction factor to extrapolate the data to
Forsmark rock under in situ conditions. Assuming the measured BET surface area for monolithic
samples of Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) reported by /André et al. 2009/, the
mechanical damage transfer factor, fm was estimated to be:
log10 fm ≈ –1.70±0.23								                                                             (F-1)
Since no error estimate is given for the BET surface area of the crushed rock, the error estimate for
fm is estimated assuming only the standard error (2σ) of the Forsmark metagranite surface area. This
will tend to underestimate the true uncertainty of fm. No CEC data or any proxy information that could
be used to infer CEC is given in the reference and therefore fcec is neglected.




R-10-48                                                                                                161
Table F-1. Summary of Pb(II) numerical sorption data reported by /Papelis 2001/ for crushed
granite samples taken from the Project Shoal underground test area (Nevada, USA).

water type           NaNO3        HS-1 (Na-HCO3)   HC-4 (Na-Ca-Cl-SO4-HCO3)
Ionic strength (M)   0.01         0.0058           0.01
initial pH           Rd (m3/kg)   Rd (m3/kg)       Rd (m3/kg)

4                    1.78×10–2    4.08×10–2        n/a
5                    4.53×10–2    4.49×10–2        n/a
6                    3.56×10–1    1.33             0.733
7                    2.4          ∼100             1.9
8                    ∼100         ∼100             4.9
9                    ∼100         ∼100             n/a




Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
Assuming the average and standard deviation of the three Rd values for HC-4 groundwater given in
Table F-1 allows a very approximate lognormally distributed range of uncertainty to be estimated
for Pb(II) sorption which should be reasonably justifiable for the SR-Site application groundwater
conditions. Since the sample size is very small, the 2σ standard error estimate was propagated in the
calculations. The recommended Kd (m3/kg) range estimated in this manner is:
log10 Kd ≈ –1.6±0.6								                                                             (F-2)
Since the sorption of Pb(II) is expected to be dominated by an inner-sphere complexation mechanism
in the pH and ionic strength range of interest, this value is assumed for all application groundwater
compositions. Although there is a weak geochemical analogy between Pb and Ni, it is not clear whether
using recommended Kd data for Ni would be an over-pessimistic assumption owing to a possibly greater
sensitivity of sorption to ionic strength in the case of Ni. Unfortunately, there appear to be no studies
documented in the literature where the comparative sorption of Pb and any of its analogue solutes have
been measured simultaneously under relevant pH and ionic strength conditions. It is noted, however,
that a non-trivial ionic strength dependency was observed for Pb sorption on zeolitised tuff from Nevada
/Um and Papelis 2003/ which suggests that under certain conditions, outer-sphere complexation/ion-
exchange behaviour might occur. If Pb is deemed to be important radionuclide for safety calculations, a
case could be made by appealing to arguments of caution for adopting recommended Kd data for Ni(II)
as an alternative to the uncertain range estimated for Pb(II) in Equation F-2.




162                                                                                              R-10-48
                                                                                    Appendix G

Kd data derivation sheet for neptunium (Np)
Overview of site investigation data
Site specific sorption data were obtained for Np during the site investigations at Forsmark /Byegård
et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/. These data are summarised in the bedrock transport
properties site descriptive model /Crawford 2008/ and are the basis for Kd values recommended for
use in SR-Site under oxidising to mildly reducing conditions.
Although sorption experiments were carried out in an inert glove box atmosphere, the intensity of
the sorption and the fact that no particular effort was made to maintain reducing conditions suggests
that Np was most likely present in the pentavalent redox state, Np(V). Given that there were only a
relatively small number of measurements available from the site investigations and because of the
sensitivity of Np(V) sorption to possibly drifting pH and redox conditions, no attempt was made to
interpret the data with regard to time dependent behaviour. The Forsmark site data are based on rock
samples taken from two borehole sections while the Laxemar site data are based on rock samples
taken from a single borehole section.


Overview of available literature data
The most detailed set of sorption data for relevant rock types and groundwater compositions in
the open literature is documented by /Huitti et al. 1996/. In this study, sorption was measured on
crushed rock samples from three borehole sections representing three different alteration types of
Rapakivi granite (Hästholmen, Finland). The sorption experiments were carried out under both
oxic and anoxic conditions using a natural groundwater sample (LPVA2) with an ionic strength of
about 0.17 M and liquid to solid ratio of 10 ml/g. The groundwater was dominated by NaCl with a
composition close to that of the Marine groundwater type used in the Forsmark and Laxemar labora-
tory investigations. Owing to the large iron content of the groundwater (~6 mg/l), the groundwater
samples used in the oxic experiments were equilibrated with the ambient atmosphere for a period of
a week and filtered (0.22 µm Millipore filter) prior to use. For experiments carried out under anoxic
conditions, the sampled groundwater was preserved in nitrogen atmosphere to prevent oxidation of
the Fe(II) content of the water (~5 mg/l).
Sorption experiments were carried out on three samples of granite described as fresh, weathered, and
altered. Generally it was found that the sorption of Np did not scale linearly with BET surface area
and Rd values estimated for the weathered and altered samples were somewhat less than what would
be otherwise predicted on the basis of their larger surface areas. Material properties of the rock
samples are given in Table G-1.

Table G-1. Material properties of rock types investigated by /Huitti et al. 1996/. Means and
standard deviations given for three replicate samples.

Sample                          YT5-1       YT5-2       YT5-3

Type                            Fresh       Weathered   Altered
ABET (m2/g)                     0.31±0.01   3.51±1.94   1.0±0.12
CEC (cmol/kg)                   1.01±0.28   3.7±0.17    1.7±0.17
Biotite (vol%)                  3.8%        4.2%        1.4%
Hornblende (vol%)               5.2%        –           –
Chlorite (vol%)                 1.2%        12.4%       2.6%
Fe oxides, amorphous (mg/g)     1.2–1.5     0.89–0.99   1.2–1.5
Fe oxides, crystalline (mg/g)   0.14–0.19   2.8–3.2     2.1–2.2




R-10-48                                                                                           163
The Rd data compiled in /Huitti et al. 1996/ are estimated in terms of the percentage sorbed, S(%)
which is calculated with the aid of a radiometric mass balance. Owing to underlying uncertainty
in the data and the small number of samples, the methods outlined in Appendix C were used to
estimate expanded ranges of uncertainty. There are 12 numerical data points for each of the three
alteration types of Rapakivi granite that were used in the experiments under oxic conditions. These
represent Np(V) spike concentrations in the range 10–13 M, 10–9 M, and 10–7 M (4 replicates for each
concentration level and rock type). Since there were no large disparities in sorption strength between
the different concentrations, no distinction was made between these data sub-sets in the subsequent
analysis. The contact time was 40 days for the 10–9 M and 10–7 M spike concentrations and 28 days
for the 10–13 M spike concentration level.
For the experiments performed under anoxic conditions, a contact time of 31 days and 77 days was
used for two sets of three replicates for each rock type. Since the dissolution of Np activity on the
Teflon platelets was typically incomplete under anoxic conditions, the spike concentration varied
from sample to sample. The sorption was sufficiently strong under anoxic conditions that only the
minimum Rd value could be reported. An example of some of the data reported in /Huitti et al. 1996/
is given in Table G-2.
As can be seen from Table G-2, the Rd estimates obtained under oxic conditions are likely to be
relatively precise given the S(%) ranges reported. The degree of sorption under anoxic conditions,
however, was so strong that it is nearly impossible to determine the Rd with any kind of accuracy.


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
Np is somewhat unusual in that a mixture of site data and literature data have been considered in the
recommendation of Kd ranges for use in SR-Site safety assessment calculations. Although the site
specific data are primarily used to establish the recommended Kd data range, the Finnish data from
/Huitti et al. 1996/ are used in a supporting role to provide a consistency check on the values derived
from site specific materials studied in the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations. The selection
procedure and associated calculations are described separately since data handling procedures were
different for the site investigation and literature data.


Table G-2. Results of sorption measurements on fresh Rapakivi granite under oxic and anoxic
conditions. Final pH and Eh values were measured for the experiments performed under anoxic
conditions.

Conc. (M)   contact time   S(%)       Rd (m3/kg)   final pH   final Eh (mV)

10–13       28 days        64.4±1.2   0.019
                           56.8±1.3   0.014
                           55.3±1.4   0.013
                           57.9±1.3   0.014
10–9        28 days        64.1±3.6   0.019
                           62.6±3.8   0.018
                           69.1±3.4   0.024
                           63.2±1.4   0.018
10–7        28 days        60.7±1.0   0.016
                           56.5±1.0   0.014
                           61.1±0.9   0.017
                           61.1±0.9   0.016
n/a         31 days        100±1      ≥ 1.4        7.95       +54
                           100±1      ≥ 1.3        7.94       +62
                           99±1       ≥ 1.6        7.99       +68
n/a         77 days        98.1±1     ≥ 1.1        7.80       –65
                           100±1      ≥ 1.1        7.76       –65
                           100±1      ≥ 1.2        7.66       –69




164                                                                                              R-10-48
 Site specific data from Forsmark and Laxemar
 The procedure for derivation of Kd values for Np(V) sorption relevant for application within SR-Site
 consisted of the following steps:
 1. The Rd data for each groundwater type, taken separately, was pooled without any additional
    filtering by rock type, contact time, or particle size.
 2. A surface area transfer factor (fA) was first used to normalise the raw Rd data for different particle
    size fractions to R 0d values corresponding to the reference crushed rock size fraction (2–4 mm)
    using Equation 5-6.
 3. A mechanical damage transfer factor (fm) was then used to account for the difference in surface
    area between the reference size fraction of crushed rock and that of monolithic samples deemed
    to be approximately representative of the in situ rock. This transfer factor was calculated using
    Equation 5-7 and applied assuming the geometric mean as the central value. Only the central
    value of the fm distribution was propagated in the subsequent calculations. Sample-specific fm
    values were calculated individually for the same borehole sampling intervals as the samples used
    in the sorption experiments.
 4. A cation exchange capacity (CEC) transfer factor, fcec was used to account for differences between
    the CEC of site specific rock at Forsmark and the rock used in the laboratory experiments which
    includes samples taken from Laxemar with different CEC. The transfer factor was calculated
    using Equation 5-8 and applied assuming the geometric mean as the central value. The same
    transfer factor was for all samples used in the sorption experiments since CEC estimates were
    not available on sample by sample basis. Only the central value of the fcec distribution was
    propagated in the subsequent calculations.
 Since Np(V) has been shown to sorb preferentially in association with biotite, the CEC transfer factor
 is considered relevant for this radionuclide even though Np(V) sorption is thought to occur primarily
 by way of a surface complexation mechanism. Estimated Kd0 data corrected for surface area normalisa-
 tion, mechanical damage, and CEC effects using Equation 5-2 are plotted in Figure G-1. Here, it is
 implicitly assumed that the measured Rd data correspond to the sorption of the Np(V) redox species.


                1
                           Brine (Fm SDM)

               0.9         Brine (Lx SDM)

                           Fresh (Fm SDM)
               0.8
                           Fresh (Lx SDM)
               0.7
                           Marine (Fm SDM)

               0.6         Marine (Lx SDM)




CDF (% rank)
                           Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)
               0.5
                           Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)
               0.4
                           Type V (Lx SDM)

               0.3         minimum effective Kd


               0.2


               0.1


                0
                1.00E-07     1.00E-06             1.00E-05   1.00E-04      1.00E-03   1.00E-02   1.00E-01

                                                             Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure G-1. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Np(V) sorption based on raw Rd data for site-specific rock
 types and groundwater compositions as reported in the Forsmark (Fm SDM) and Laxemar (Lx SDM) site
 investigations. Surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fA, fm, and fcec) have
 been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate
 for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented as an empirical
 cumulative distribution function. A minimum effective Kd reference line is plotted in the figure indicating the
 upper 95% confidence limit for the matrix storage capacity of the rock based on water saturation porosity.


 R-10-48                                                                                                    165
 Certain very low K 0d values (in some cases less than the minimum effective Kd reference line) arise
 due to random errors dominating the radiometric mass balance when sorption is close to the limit of
 quantification. Roughly 16% of the Forsmark saline data set consists of very low or negative values
 owing to random errors of this sort implying a censored lower limit for the data set.


 Literature data for Rapakivi granite
 From the sorption percentages and their uncertainties tabulated in the reference, the values of Rd
 and their associated error estimates were re-estimated using the Monte Carlo approach outlined in
 Appendix C. Based on the sorption percentage ranges, S(%) reported in Table G-2 for oxic condi-
 tions, it is expected that the uncertainty estimates of the re-calculated data can be reliably assumed
 to be lognormally distributed for oxic conditions. Since there are only a very limited number of data
 points, the individual Rd values and their uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex
 combination of the underlying lognormal uncertainties. This is the main motivation for the recalcula-
 tion of the literature Rd values to obtain the associated error estimates. The composite distribution of
 Rd values thus obtained is shown in Figure G-2.
 As can be seen from the data plotted in Figure G-2, the re-sampled data indicate that there are only
 minor differences between the sorptivities measured for the different alteration types of Rapakivi
 granite. It should also be noted that the relatively small spread of the data is related to the small number
 of measurements and the narrow uncertainty spans of the estimated values. There are, however,
 relatively large differences between the BET surface areas and the CEC measured for these different
 rock types that do not translate into corresponding shifts in sorptivity. In this work a decision was taken
 to disregard the data for weathered and altered rock since the surface area and CEC transfer factors
 would thereby imply excessively low (i.e. over-pessimistic) Kd values for application conditions that
 may not be physically meaningful. Since there are many uncertainties in the quantitative extrapolation
 of Kd values for safety assessment, the selection of the most geologically similar material and rejection
 of data for substantially dissimilar materials is deemed by the author to be appropriate in this case given
 that the characteristics of Np sorption on granitic rock and its relation to surface area and CEC is not
 fully understood at this time.


                1
                          YT5-3 (Altered rock)

               0.9        YT5-2 (Weathered rock)

                          YT5-1 (Fresh rock)
               0.8        minimum effective Kd


               0.7


               0.6




CDF (% rank)
               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-07   1.00E-06             1.00E-05    1.00E-04    1.00E-03   1.00E-02   1.00E-01

                                                          Rd (m /kg)
                                                            0   3



 Figure G-2. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Np(V) sorption based on literature Rd data and presented as
 an empirical cumulative distribution function for Rapakivi granite samples described as being fresh, weath-
 ered, and altered. The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-estimated from tabulated
 sorption percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distribution plotted in the figure.



 166                                                                                                    R-10-48
 The Rd data corresponding to the fresh Rapakivi granite were chosen as being the most relevant data
 set for extrapolation to site specific conditions at Forsmark. The BET surface area and CEC of the
 crushed rock is given in Table G-1. Since only one particle size was used in the experiments, it was
 only necessary to use a single correction factor to extrapolate the data to Forsmark rock under in situ
 conditions. Assuming the measured BET surface area for monolithic samples of Forsmark metagran-
 ite (SKB rock code 101057) reported by /André et al. 2009/, the mechanical damage transfer factor,
 fm and its formal uncertainty was estimated to be:
 log10 fm ≈ –1.29±0.23								                                                               (G-1)
 Estimation of the CEC transfer factor, fcec is somewhat more difficult on account of both that the CEC
 of the Forsmark material is not known to an acceptable degree of precision and that different methods
 have been used to measure the CEC. In this case it was necessary to assume a CEC of 1.0±0.5 cmol/kg,
 for Forsmark metagranite which should be regarded as an order of magnitude estimate of the true CEC
 and its associated uncertainty. On the basis of this assumption, the CEC transfer factor is estimated to be:
 log10 fcec ≈ –0.1±0.43								                                                              (G-2)
 Using the fm and fcec transfers factors, estimated K 0d values were calculated for the original 12 data
 points. On account of the limited number of data points, the individual K 0d values and their uncertain-
 ties were re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying lognormal distributions, now
 including the additional uncertainties of the fm and fcec transfer factors. The resulting, translated and
 expanded uncertainty distribution for K 0d is shown in Figure G-3.


                1


               0.9        LPVA2 groundwater (Saline, Aerobic)


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-05           1.00E-04                      1.00E-03   1.00E-02   1.00E-01

                                                           Kd (m /kg)
                                                                0    3



 Figure G-3. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Np(V) sorption based on literature Rd data. Surface area
 normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fCEC) have been considered in
 the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark
 metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented as an empirical cumulative
 distribution function.




 R-10-48                                                                                                 167
 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 The site investigation data and literature derived values (taken from Figure G-1 and Figure G-3) are
 shown side by side in Figure G-4. Although the K 0d values derived from site specific and literature
 data show reasonable agreement, they have been processed in different ways and it is possible that
 this could introduce unnecessary bias if the different data sets were to be combined numerically.
 Bearing this in mind, and the fact that a relatively good data set was already available for the site
 specific materials, the data from /Huitti et al. 1996/ have not been used in the final Kd recommenda-
 tion and should instead be considered as a consistency check on the values derived independently
 from the site investigation data.
 If it is assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to variable groundwater composition are
 internalised in the individual data sets shown previously in Figure G-1, a recommended range for
 application in SR-Site can be defined by aggregating these into a global data set. The relevant Kd
 range for application in SR-Site is given in Figure G-5.


 Assessment of predominant redox state under application
 groundwater conditions
 To ascertain the principal redox state of Np under application groundwater conditions, the speciation
 of Np was calculated for 20,000 randomly sampled groundwater compositions taken from the SR-Site
 temperate domain simulations /Salas et al. 2010/. The calculations were made for the prevailing
 groundwater chemistry at time 2,000 y, 3,000 y, 5,000 y, and 9,000 y using PHREEQC and the
 SKB-TDB /Duro et al. 2006/. Since it is not certain which redox couple can be assumed to dominate
 the groundwater redox conditions in the SR-Site temperate case groundwater simulations, two different
 redox couples were assumed as individual case studies for groundwater redox control. These are:
 a) The Fe2+ / Fe(OH)3 redox pair using equilibrium constants consistent with the calibration model
    derived by /Grenthe et al. 1992/.
 b) The SO 42–/FeSam redox pair.


                1
                          Brine (Fm SDM)

               0.9        Brine (Lx SDM)

                          Fresh (Fm SDM)
               0.8
                          Fresh (Lx SDM)

               0.7        Marine (Fm SDM)

                          Marine (Lx SDM)
               0.6



CDF (% rank)
                          Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)

               0.5        Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)

                          Type V (Lx SDM)
               0.4
                          YT5-1/LPVA2 (Saline)

                          minimum effective Kd
               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0

               1.00E-07     1.00E-06             1.00E-05    1.00E-04     1.00E-03   1.00E-02   1.00E-01

                                                            Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure G-4. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Np(V) sorption corrected to give values deemed appropriate
 for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions. This figure combines the data
 from the site investigations (Figure G-1) and literature data (Figure G-3) and indicates a relatively good
 agreement between the data sets of different origin.



 168                                                                                                       R-10-48
                1
                          Aggregate data set (all groundwater compositions)

               0.9        lognormal fit

                          minimum effective Kd
               0.8

               0.7

               0.6




CDF (% rank)
                                                                                         log10Kd = -3.38±0.74
               0.5

               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1

                0
               1.00E-07   1.00E-06        1.00E-05        1.00E-04            1.00E-03      1.00E-02       1.00E-01   1.00E+00

                                                               Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure G-5. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Np(V) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.


 In addition to calculating the actual speciation of Np in the application groundwater, sweep calcula-
 tions were made for a range of hypothetical redox potentials to ascertain the location of the redox
 transition point where the Np(IV) and Np(V) species are present in roughly equal concentrations.
 For numerical reasons this was done only for the convex hull of data points describing the envelope
 of pH and total carbonate concentrations in the application groundwater. From these data, a plane of
 best fit can then be calculated for the transition point which can be shown to be valid for all ground-
 water compositions within the convex hull. This provides a visual means of ascertaining how close
 the system is to the point of Np(IV)/Np(V) redox transition. The redox parameter space calculated
 in this fashion is plotted in Figure G-6 for the groundwater compositions existing at 2,000 y in the
 temperate case groundwater simulations.
 Although the location of the plane of best fit roughly demarcates the regions of predominance of
 the oxidising and reducing forms of Np, it does not show the full extent of the region where non-
 negligible fractions of both redox species can co-exist. The redox sweep data are therefore plotted in
 Figure G-7 where the fraction of the reduced Np(IV) form is given as a function of redox potential.
 There is a general tendency for the redox potential to decrease over time in the SR-Site temperate case
 simulations due to the freshening of the groundwater with a meteoric component of higher carbonate
 content. The redox parameter space is plotted in Figure G-8 for the groundwater compositions existing
 at 9,000 y. These represent the highest redox potentials encountered in the temperate time period
 simulated for SR-Site. As can be seen from Figure G-8 and Figure G-9, conditions are sufficiently
 reducing at 9,000 y for Np(IV) to be the dominant redox species.




 R-10-48                                                                                                                         169
  Figure G-6. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater
  compositions at 2,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO42-/FeSam redox couple. The calcula-
  tions indicate that all sampled groundwater compositions are sufficiently reducing for Np(IV) to be the
  dominant redox species (min and max Eh range indicated by green and blue coloured outline rectangles).
  The theoretical transition region where Np(IV) and Np(V) are present in equal concentration is indicated
  by the red plane (red markers are mapped to the plane at the same pH and carbonate coordinates as the
  actual groundwater compositions for reference purposes).


                        Fully Reducing conditions, Np(IV)    Transition region, Np(IV,V)       Fully oxidising conditions, Np(V)
                                                             (depends on pH and HCO3-)
                   1


                  0.9


                  0.8


                  0.7


                  0.6




fraction Np(IV)
                  0.5


                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                   0
                   -400               -300            -200            -100                 0               100              200
                                                                   Eh (mV)

  Figure G-7. Theoretical redox transition zone for Np (blue shaded region) compared with redox conditions
  in SR-Site temperate case at 2,000 y (dark green shaded region) which encompasses the potential span of
  both the Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The light green and red shaded areas represent fully reducing
  (100% Np(IV)) and fully oxidising (100% Np(V)) conditions, respectively. The cross-hairs in the figure
  approximately indicate the centroid of the transition point for the application groundwater pH and carbonate
  ranges illustrated previously in Figure G-6.


  170                                                                                                                              R-10-48
  Figure G-8. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater com-
  positions at 9,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO42-/FeSam redox couple. The calculations
  indicate that all sampled groundwater compositions are sufficiently reducing for Np(IV) to be the dominant
  redox species (min and max Eh range indicated by coloured rectangles). The theoretical transition region
  where Np(IV) and Np(V) are present in equal concentration is indicated by the red plane (red markers are
  mapped to the plane at the same pH and carbonate coordinates as the actual groundwater compositions for
  reference purposes).


                         Fully Reducing conditions, Np(IV)    Transition region, Np(IV,V)   Fully oxidising conditions, Np(V)
                                                              (depends on pH and HCO3-)
                   1


                  0.9


                  0.8


                  0.7




fraction Np(IV)
                  0.6


                  0.5


                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                   0
                        -400           -300            -200           -100              0             100             200

                                                                  Eh (mV)

  Figure G-9. Theoretical redox transition zone for Np (blue shaded region) compared with redox conditions
  in SR-Site temperate case at 9,000 y (dark green shaded region) which encompasses the potential span of both
  Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The light green and red shaded areas represent fully reducing (100% Np(IV))
  and fully oxidising (100% Np(V)) conditions, respectively. The cross-hairs in the figure approximately indicate
  the centroid of the transition point for the application groundwater pH and carbonate ranges illustrated
  previously in Figure G-8.



  R-10-48                                                                                                                       171
                                                                                                                      Appendix H

Kd data derivation sheet for nickel (Ni)
Overview of site investigation data
Site specific sorption data were obtained for Ni(II) during the site investigations at Forsmark /Byegård
et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/. These data are summarised in the bedrock transport
properties site descriptive model /Crawford 2008/ and are the basis for Kd values recommended for
use in SR-Site. In most cases (although there are some exceptions) there is a time dependency in
the experimental data with a clear trend towards higher Rd values at increasing times. The data also
exhibit a relatively clear surface area dependency whereby smaller crushed particle sizes are associated
with higher sorptivities than larger size fractions. A typical time series for Ni(II) sorption on Forsmark
metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) is shown in Figure H-1.
The Forsmark site data are based on rock samples taken from three borehole sections while the Laxemar
site data are based on rock samples taken from a single borehole section. For the same reasons discussed
previously in relation to Cs(I) sorption, no attempt has been made to model the time dependency of
the data. The data for Ni(II) sorption therefore have been treated by considering the raw data set in
its entirety without filtering on the basis of crushed size fraction or contact time.


Overview of available literature data
The most detailed set of sorption data for relevant rock types and groundwater compositions in the
open literature is documented by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/. In this study, sorption was measured
on two crushed rock samples taken from different sites. These were a tonalite (Olkiluoto) crushed to
a particle size specified as less than 3 mm, and a Rapakivi granite (Hästholmen) crushed to a particle
size specified as less than 2 mm. The sorption experiments were carried out under oxic conditions
using natural groundwater samples native to each site. The Olkiluoto groundwater (TVO-GW)
was fresh in character with an ionic strength of 0.017 M. The Hästholmen groundwater (IVO-GW)


                1
                         Ni(II), Saline_Fm (mean of triplicate samples)




               0.1




Rd (m3/kg)



              0.01



                                                                                1-2 mm size fraction

                                                                                0.25-0.5 mm size fraction

                                                                                0.063-0.125 mm size fraction

             0.001
                     1                               10                         100                            1000
                                                          contact time (days)

Figure H-1. Typical time series for Ni(II) sorption Rd (m3/kg) measured in the Forsmark site investigation
studies. There is a clear sorption dependency on both particle size and time.




R-10-48                                                                                                                      173
 was more saline with an ionic strength of 0.21 M. Rd values and sorption percentages, S(%) were
 estimated for contact times ranging from 7 days to 6 months for a Ni spike concentrations in the range
 of 3×10–8 –1.3×10–7 M. The Rd data compiled in /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/ are given without error
 estimates although the sorption percentages are specified with uncertainties. In all there were 84 meas-
 urements of Rd for each rock type corresponding to different spike concentrations and contact times.


 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 For Ni(II) sorption, a mixture of site data and literature data have been considered in the recommen-
 dation of Kd ranges for use in SR-Site safety assessment calculations. Although the site specific data
 are primarily used to establish the recommended Kd data range, the Finnish data from /Kulmala and
 Hakanen 1993/ are used in a supporting role to provide a consistency check on the values derived
 from site specific materials studied in the Forsmark and Laxemar site investigations. The selection
 procedure and associated calculations are described separately since data handling procedures were
 different for the site investigation and literature data.


 Site specific data from Forsmark and Laxemar
 Since the sorption of Ni(II) appears to exhibit an ionic strength dependency, the procedure for derivation
 of Kd values relevant for application within SR-Site consisted of the same steps as described previously
 for Cs(I). The main difference in this case is that no suitable ion-exchange or surface complexation
 model is available to describe the ionic strength dependency of Ni(II) sorption. Estimated Kd0 data
 corrected for surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC effects are plotted in Figure H-2
 assuming Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type for the Forsmark
 site. Although the uncertainty ranges for the individual data sets are large, there is a clear tendency
 towards greater sorptivity under low ionic strength conditions relative to that obtained for the more
 saline groundwater types.


                1
                             Brine (Fm SDM)
               0.9           Brine (Lx SDM)

                             Fresh (Fm SDM)
               0.8
                             Fresh (Lx SDM)
               0.7
                             Marine (Fm SDM)

               0.6           Marine (Lx SDM)




CDF (% rank)
                             Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)
               0.5
                             Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)

               0.4           Type V (Lx SDM)

                             minimum effective Kd
               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-06   1.00E-05             1.00E-04          1.00E-03   1.00E-02   1.00E-01

                                                          Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure H-2. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Ni(II) sorption based on raw Rd data for site-specific rock
 types and groundwater compositions as reported in the Forsmark (Fm SDM) and Laxemar (Lx SDM) site
 investigations. Surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fA, fm, and
 fcec) have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed
 appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented
 as an empirical cumulative distribution function. A minimum effective Kd reference line is plotted in the
 figure indicating the upper 95% confidence limit for the matrix storage capacity of the rock based on water
 saturation porosity.


 174                                                                                                 R-10-48
 Literature data for Tonalite and Rapakivi granite
 Using the procedures outlined in Appendix C, the Rd values and their error estimates were re-calculated
 from the S(%) values given in /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/. The individual Rd values and their
 uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying uncertainty
 distributions. The composite distribution of Rd values thus obtained is shown in Figure H-3.
 Although the data plotted in Figure H-3 have not been corrected for differences in BET surfaces
 area or CEC, the data appear to exhibit an ionic strength dependency with the fresh groundwater
 sample giving higher Rd values relative to the saline groundwater. No BET surface area or CEC
 measurement data are given in /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/, although BET data are given in other
 reports /Huitti et al. 1996, 1998/ for the same materials crushed to the same grain size. Assuming
 the measured BET surface area for monolithic samples of Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code
 101057) reported by /André et al. 2009/, the mechanical damage transfer factor, fm and its formal
 uncertainty (2σ) was estimated to be:
 log10 fm ≈ –1.23±0.26                 (Olkilutoto tonalite)					                                (H-1)
 log10 fm ≈ –1.29±0.23                 (Hästholmen, Rapakivi granite)				                        (H-2)
 The CEC is unknown for these rock types although the biotite content has been estimated to 6.6%
 by volume for Olkiluoto tonalite /Huitti et al. 1998/ and 3.8% for Rapakivi granite from Hästholmen
 /Huitti et al. 1996/. Given that the biotite content of Forsmark metagranite is roughly 5.4% by volume
 /Sandström and Stephens 2009/, this allows the estimation of a very approximate CEC transfer factor:
 log10 fcec ≈ –0.087                   (Olkilutoto tonalite)					                                (H-3)
 log10 fcec ≈ 0.15		                   (Hästholmen, Rapakivi granite)				                        (H-4)
 Using the fm and fcec transfer factors, estimated K 0d values were calculated for the original data points.
 Owing to the large uncertainties associated with the transfer factors, the individual K 0d values and
 their uncertainties were re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying lognormal dis-
 tributions, now including the additional uncertainty of the fm transfer factor. Since it was not possible
 to estimate a formal uncertainty for the CEC transfer factor, the additional uncertainty arising due to
 this transfer factor was neglected. The resulting, translated and expanded uncertainty distribution for
 K 0d is shown in Figure H-4.


                1

                          Tonalite + saline groundwater (IVO-GW)
               0.9
                          Rapakivi Granite + fresh groundwater (TVO-GW)
               0.8


               0.7


               0.6




CDF (% rank)
               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-04           1.00E-03                   1.00E-02      1.00E-01   1.00E+00

                                                            Rd (m /kg)
                                                                   0   3



 Figure H-3. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Ni(II) sorption based on literature Rd data and presented as
 an empirical cumulative distribution function for Olkiluoto tonalite (TVO-GW) and Rapakivi granite sam-
 ples (IVO-GW). The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-calculated from tabulated
 sorption percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distribution plotted in the figure.


 R-10-48                                                                                                 175
                1

                           Saline (IVO-GW)
               0.9
                           Fresh (TVO-GW)

               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
                1.00E-04           1.00E-03    1.00E-02       1.00E-01           1.00E+00

                                              Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure H-4. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Ni(II) sorption based on literature Rd data. Surface area
 normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fCEC) have been considered in
 the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark
 metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented as an empirical cumulative
 distribution function.


 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 The site investigation data and literature derived values (taken from Figure H-2 and Figure H-4) are
 shown side by side in Figure H-5. Although the K 0d values derived from site specific and literature
 data show reasonable agreement, they have been processed in different ways and it is possible that
 this could introduce unnecessary bias if the different data sets were to be combined numerically.
 Bearing this in mind, and the fact that a relatively good data set was already available for the site
 specific materials, the data from /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/ have not been used in the final Kd
 recommendation and should instead be considered as a consistency check on the values derived
 independently from the site investigation data.
 Since an appropriate ion-exchange or surface complexation model is not available to provide chemistry
 transfer factors for application groundwater conditions, a stochastic approach based upon linear regression
 of the individual data sets was employed. The method was based on random sampling (105 samples)
 of the ionic strength distribution of the application groundwater to obtain the independent variable.
 The regression equation was then used directly to estimate the expected change in Kd resulting from
 variable ionic strength plus a random error for the unexplained variation. The resulting Kd values are
 plotted in Figure H-6 to Figure H-9 for the SR-Site calculation cases corresponding to the temperate
 time domain.
 Although the spread of the simulated data (grey markers) in the cross-plots appears large, it should
 be noted that this represents the entire extrapolated data set whereas the individual groundwater types
 are plotted with 1σ error bars. Generally the data indicate that the random error component is larger
 than the systematic trend due to ionic strength variation.




 176                                                                                                R-10-48
                   1
                                    Brine (Fm SDM)

                  0.9               Brine (Lx SDM)

                                    Fresh (Fm SDM)
                  0.8               Saline (IVO-GW)

                                    Fresh (TVO-GW)
                  0.7
                                    Fresh (Lx SDM)

                                    Marine (Fm SDM)




CDF (% rank)
                  0.6
                                    Marine (Lx SDM)

                  0.5               Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)

                                    Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)
                  0.4               Type V (Lx SDM)

                                    minimum effective Kd
                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                   0
                  1.00E-06      1.00E-05              1.00E-04              1.00E-03          1.00E-02           1.00E-01

                                                              Kd (m /kg)
                                                                   0    3



  Figure H-5. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Ni(II) sorption corrected to give values deemed appropriate
  for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions. This figure combines the data
  from the site investigations (Figure H-2) and literature data (Figure H-4) and indicates a relatively good
  agreement between the data sets of different origin.


                   0




                   -1
                                    Fresh                                                            Saline (Lx)
                                                 TVO-GW


                   -2                                              Type V




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                   -3




                   -4                       Saline (Fm)
                                                                                                             Brine
                                                         Marine


                   -5
                                                                                                   IVO-GW




                   -6
                        -3   -2.5           -2              -1.5             -1        -0.5              0            0.5

                                                 log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

  Figure H-6. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Ni(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
  The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 2,000 y in the temperate case and are
  plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
  the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.




  R-10-48                                                                                                                   177
                   0




                  -1
                                     Fresh                                                 Saline (Lx)
                                                       TVO-GW

                                                                    Type V
                  -2




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                  -3




                  -4                         Saline (Fm)
                                                                                                     Brine
                                                         Marine


                  -5
                                                                                          IVO-GW




                  -6
                       -3    -2.5             -2                -1.5         -1    -0.5          0            0.5

                                                       log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure H-7. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Ni(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 3,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


                  0



                                       TVO-GW
                  -1
                                                                                          Saline (Lx)
                                     Fresh


                  -2




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                  -3


                            Type V

                  -4                     Saline (Fm)
                                                                                                 Brine
                                                         Marine


                  -5
                                                                                          IVO-GW




                  -6
                       -3    -2.5             -2             -1.5            -1   -0.5       0               0.5

                                                   log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure H-8. Cross-plot of Kd (m /kg) values for Ni(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
                                                   3

The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 5,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


178                                                                                                                 R-10-48
                  0


                                      TVO-GW
                  -1
                                     Fresh                                            Saline (Lx)



                  -2




log10Kd (m3/kg)   -3


                            Type V

                  -4                                                                       Brine
                               Saline (Fm)



                  -5
                                      Marine                                        IVO-GW




                  -6
                       -3    -2.5            -2         -1.5        -1       -0.5      0            0.5

                                                  log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

 Figure H-9. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Ni(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
 The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 9,000 y in the temperate case and are
 plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
 the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


 Based on the regression model calculations, the following Kd ranges for Ni(II) are recommended for
 use at different times in the hydrogeochemical evolution of the repository environment:
 log10 Kd ≈ –2.96±0.65                  (t = 2,000 y)						                                               (H-5)
 log10 Kd ≈ –2.96±0.65                  (t = 3,000 y)						                                               (H-6)
 log10 Kd ≈ –2.91±0.65                  (t = 5,000 y)						                                               (H-7)
 log10 Kd ≈ –2.82±0.65                  (t = 9,000 y)						                                               (H-8)
 As can be seen from the recommended data, the changing salinity of the repository environment has
 only a weak impact on the Kd distribution, with a tendency to towards slightly higher sorptivities with
 time. Since it is not possible to consider temporally variable Kd values in safety assessment calcula-
 tions, the time period giving the lowest Kd value is recommended to be used for calculations. This
 corresponds to the groundwater conditions existing at 3,000 y. Generally the numerically calculated Kd
 uncertainties were found to be lognormally distributed (see Figure H-10).




 R-10-48                                                                                                          179
                      0.6



                                     t = 5000 y
                      0.5




Probability Density
                      0.4




                      0.3
                                                                                 t = 9000 y



                      0.2




                      0.1




                        0
                         -5   -4.5   -4           -3.5     -3      -2.5     -2     -1.5       -1   -0.5

                                                         log10 Kd (m /kg)
                                                                    3




  Figure H-10. Comparison of Kd (m3/kg) distributions predicted for Ni(II) at 5,000 y and 9,000 y. The data
  are plotted in histogram form with a fitted lognormal distribution in each case. Both data sets are well
  described by a lognormal distribution.




  180                                                                                                     R-10-48
                                                                                            Appendix I

 Kd data derivation sheet for niobium (Nb)
 Overview and evaluation of available literature data
 The most detailed set of Nb sorption data for relevant rock types and groundwater compositions is
 documented by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/. In this study, sorption was measured on two crushed
 rock samples taken from different sites. These were a tonalite (Olkiluoto) crushed to a particle size
 specified as less than 3 mm, and a Rapakivi granite (Hästholmen) crushed to a particle size specified as
 less than 2 mm. The sorption experiments were carried out under oxic conditions using natural ground-
 water samples native to each site. The Olkiluoto groundwater (TVO-GW) was fresh in character with
 an ionic strength of 0.017 M. The Hästholmen groundwater (IVO-GW) was more saline with an ionic
 strength of 0.21 M. The Rd values and sorption percentages, S(%) were estimated for contact times
 ranging from 7 days to 6 months for Nb(V) spike concentrations in the range 2.8×10–11 –6.8×10–10 M.
 The Rd data compiled in /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/ are given without error estimates although the
 sorption percentages are specified with uncertainties as noted previously for Ni(II). In all there were 72 Rd
 measurements for each rock type corresponding to different spike concentrations and contact times.


 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 The Rd values and their error estimates were re-calculated from the raw data in /Kulmala and
 Hakanen 1993/ using the procedure outlined in Appendix C. The individual Rd values and their
 uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying uncertainty
 distributions. The composite distribution of Rd values thus obtained is shown in Figure I-1.


                1
                          Tonalite + saline groundwater (IVO-GW)
               0.9        Rapakivi Granite + fresh groundwater (TVO-GW)


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                 0
               1.00E-02                    1.00E-01                       1.00E+00     1.00E+01
                                                         Rd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure I-1. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Nb(V) sorption based on literature Rd data and presented as
 an empirical cumulative distribution function for Olkiluoto tonalite (TVO-GW) and Rapakivi granite sam-
 ples (IVO-GW). The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-estimated from tabulated
 sorption percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distribution plotted in the figure.




 R-10-48                                                                                                  181
 No large differences are noted between the data sets for saline and fresh groundwater types which is in
 keeping with the postulated (inner-sphere) surface complexation sorption mechanism. No BET surface
 area or CEC measurement data are given in /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/, although BET data are
 given in other reports /Huitti et al. 1996, 1998/ for the same materials crushed to the same grain size.
 Since the rock types are the same as discussed previously for Ni(II) sorption (Appendix H), the same
 mechanical damage and CEC transfer factors have been used:
 log10 fm ≈ –1.23±0.26              (Olkilutoto tonalite)					                                 (I-1)
 log10 fm ≈ –1.29±0.23              (Hästholmen, Rapakivi granite)				                         (I-2)
 And,
 log10 fcec ≈ –0.087                (Olkilutoto tonalite)					                                 (I-3)
 log10 fcec ≈ 0.15		                (Hästholmen, Rapakivi granite)				                         (I-4)
 Using the fm and fcec transfer factors, estimated K 0d values were calculated for the original data points.
 Owing to the large uncertainties associated with the transfer factors, the individual K 0d values and
 their uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying lognormal
 distributions, now including the additional uncertainty of the fm transfer factor. Since it was not possible
 to estimate a formal uncertainty for the CEC transfer factor, the additional uncertainty arising due to
 this transfer factor was neglected. The resulting, translated and expanded uncertainty distribution for
 K 0d is shown in Figure I-2.


                1

                          Saline (IVO-GW)
               0.9
                          Fresh (TVO-GW)
               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-04          1.00E-03     1.00E-02           1.00E-01           1.00E+00

                                            Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure I-2. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Nb(V) sorption based on literature Rd data. Surface area
 normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fcec) have been considered in
 the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark
 metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented as an empirical cumulative
 distribution function.




 182                                                                                                   R-10-48
 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 If it is assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to variable groundwater composition are
 internalised in the individual data sets shown in Figure I-2, a recommended range for application in
 SR-Site can be defined by aggregating these into a global data set. The relevant Kd range for applica-
 tion in SR-Site is given in Figure I-3.


                1
                          Aggregate data set (all groundwater compositions)
                          lognormal fit to data
               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5
                                                                     log10 Kd = -1.7±0.64

               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-04         1.00E-03           1.00E-02            1.00E-01             1.00E+00   1.00E+01
                                                           Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure I-3. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Nb(V) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.




 R-10-48                                                                                                          183
                                                                                                      Appendix J

 Kd data derivation sheet for palladium (Pd)
 Overview of available literature data
 The sorption of Pd on granitic rock is poorly covered in the literature and only one study /Tachi
 et al. 1999/ has been found where sorption has been characterised using relevant materials and water
 compositions. This reference was not available in original form, being an internal technical report of
 the former Japan Nuclear Cycle Development Institute (JNC). Data values from this reference are
 reported, however, in the JNC Sorption database /Shibutani et al. 1999/. In the reported experiments,
 pH dependent sorption was measured on finely crushed granodiorite (≤ 0.355 mm) from Gunma,
 Japan. The contact solutions were simple NaCl dilutions of ionic strength 0.01 M and 0.1 M and the
 spike concentration was reported as 5×10–8 M. In the experiments, liquid to solid ratios of 50 ml/g
 and 500 ml/g were used and the contact time was 30 days.


 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 Since no major differences were apparent between individual Rd values reported for different ionic
 strengths and liquid to solid ratios, the data are taken as is and are plotted in Figure J-1 as an aggregate
 data set.
 The BET surface area of the crushed granodiorite was reported as 0.7 m2/g. Since only one particle
 size was used in the experiments, it was only necessary to use a single transfer factor to extrapolate
 the data to Forsmark rock under in situ conditions. The mechanical damage transfer factor, fm was
 therefore estimated to be:
 log10 fm ≈ –1.65±0.23								                                                                            (J-1)
 Since no error estimate is given for the BET surface area of the crushed rock, the error estimate for
 fm is estimated assuming only the standard error (2σ) of the Forsmark metagranite surface area. This
 will tend to underestimate the true uncertainty of fm. No CEC data are given for the granodiorite used
 in the experiments, although the biotite content has been estimated to be roughly 4.32% by volume.


                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1                          Granodiorite (raw data- all groundwater compositions)


                0
               1.00E-01         1.00E+00                     1.00E+01                          1.00E+02
                                           Rd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure J-1. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Pd(II) sorption based on literature Rd data and presented as
 an empirical cumulative distribution function for Japanese granodiorite. Since there are no major differ-
 ences between the data for different water compositions (0.01 M and 0.1 M) and liquid to solid ratios (50 ml/g
 and 500 ml/g), the data are given as an aggregate set.


 R-10-48                                                                                                          185
Since Forsmark metagranite has a biotite content of roughly 5.4% by volume /Sandström and
Stephens 2009/, the CEC transfer factor, fcec is estimated to be:
log10 fcec ≈ 0.1									                                                                             (J-2)
Since CEC transfer factors based upon estimated ranges of biotite content are particularly uncertain
and because the factor calculated in Equation J-2 implies only a slightly increased sorptivity for the
extrapolation to Forsmark site specific rock, this has been neglected in subsequent calculations.


Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
Estimated K 0d values were calculated for Forsmark metagranite using the mechanical damage transfer
factor only (fcec is neglected on grounds of caution). If it is assumed that the principal uncertainties
relating to variable groundwater composition are internalised in the data, this data can be deemed
suitable for SR-Site application conditions. The recommended Kd range for use in SR-Site transport
calculations is given in Figure J-2.


                1
                          all groundwater compositions
                          lognormal fit to data
               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5
                                                                      log10 Kd = -1.21±0.76
               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-04       1.00E-03            1.00E-02        1.00E-01          1.00E+00   1.00E+01
                                                         Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure J-2. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Pd(II) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.




186                                                                                                           R-10-48
                                                                                             Appendix K

Kd data derivation sheet for plutonium (Pu)
Overview of available literature data
The most detailed data sets for sorption of Pu on relevant rock types and groundwaters are docu-
mented by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala et al. 1998/. In these studies, sorption was measured on
crushed rock taken from various sites in Finland. The sorption experiments were carried out under
both oxic and anoxic conditions using natural groundwater samples native to the various sites and
a liquid to solid ratio of 10 ml/g. For experiments carried out under anoxic conditions, the sampled
groundwater was preserved in a nitrogen atmosphere to prevent oxidation of the Fe(II) content of the
water. Spike concentrations of Pu were in the range 3.3×10–13–5.7×10–10 M for oxic experiments and
1.9×10–12–1.1×10–9 M for anoxic conditions. Material properties of the rock samples and groundwaters
used by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala et al. 1998/ are given in Table K-1.

Table K-1. Material properties of Finnish rock types investigated by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala
et al. 1998/. Means and standard deviations are given for three replicate samples where available.

Sample               YT5-1                 YT5-2                      YT5-3

Type                 Fresh granite         Weathered granite          Altered granite
Source location      Hästholmen            Hästholmen                 Hästholmen
Groundwater          LPVA2                 LPVA2                      LPVA2
Groundwater type     Saline                Saline                     Saline
particle size (mm)   ≤ 2.0                 ≤ 2.0                      ≤ 2.0
ABET (m2/g)          0.31±0.01             3.51±1.94                  1.0±0.12
CEC (cmol/kg)        1.01±0.28             3.7±0.17                   1.7±0.17
Biotite (vol%)       3.8%                  4.2%                       1.4%
Hornblende (vol%)    5.2%                  –                          –
Chlorite (vol%)      1.2%                  12.4%                      2.6%

Sample               OL1                   OL2A                       OL2B

Type                 Mica gneiss           Granodiorite/tonalite      Granodiorite/granite
Source location      Olkiluoto             Olkiluoto                  Olkiluoto
Groundwater          OLKR5                 OLKR5                      OLKR5
Groundwater type     Saline                Saline                     Saline
particle size (mm)   ≤ 2.0                 ≤ 2.0                      ≤ 2.0
ABET (m2/g)          0.95                  0.22                       0.36
CEC (cmol/kg)        1.5±0.4               2.1±0.4                    1.8±0.4
Biotite (vol%)       32.4                  6.6                        0.2
Hornblende (vol%)    –                     –                          –
Chlorite (vol%)      –                     6.4                        0.2

                     Ro1A                  Ro1B                       Ro1C

Type                 Tonalite              Leukotonalite              Mica gneiss
Source location      Romuvaara             Romuvaara                  Romuvaara
Groundwater          RoKR4                 RoKR4                      RoKR4
Groundwater type     Fresh                 Fresh                      Fresh
particle size (mm)   ≤ 2.0                 ≤ 2.0                      ≤ 2.0
ABET (m2/g)          0.28                  0.23                       0.18
CEC (cmol/kg)        1.8±0.4               1.8±0.3                    1.3±0.4
Biotite (vol%)       16.4                  2.6                        31.2
Hornblende (vol%)    –                     –                          –
Chlorite (vol%)      –                     0.6                        0.2

                     Ki4A                  Ki4B

Type                 Porphyritic granite   Porphyritic Granodiorite
Source location      Kivetty               Kivetty
Groundwater          KiKR4                 KiKR4
Groundwater type     Fresh                 Fresh
particle size (mm)   ≤ 2.0                 ≤ 2.0
ABET (m2/g)          0.21                  0.22
CEC (cmol/kg)        1.2±0.4               1.9±0.2
Biotite (vol%)       5.4                   12.0
Hornblende (vol%)    4.0                   4.4
Chlorite (vol%)      –                     –



R-10-48                                                                                             187
 The data compiled by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala et al. 1998/ are estimated in terms of the
 percentage sorbed, S(%) calculated with the aid of a radiometric mass balance. The actual Rd data
 in the references are given without error estimates and in some cases reported as “≥” a specified
 value owing to detection limit issues. In order to obtain numerical ranges of Kd including uncertainty
 estimates, the procedures outlined in Appendix C were used. Since there are only a small number of
 Rd values for each rock type, re-sampling of the Rd values and their associated errors allows a more
 realistic range of data uncertainty to be estimated. The composite distribution of Rd values obtained
 for each rock type is shown in Figure K-1 for the experiments performed under oxic conditions and
 in Figure K-2 for anoxic conditions.
 It is interesting to note the much larger Rd values estimated for the OL1, OL2A, and OL2B rock types
 from Olkiluoto in the data set for oxic conditions. When interpreting these data sets it is important to
 remember that the estimation of Rd using Equation C-2 is subject to severe restrictions when the sorp-
 tion percentage approaches 100%. As can be seen from Figure C-1, an Rd of ~1 m3/kg is approximately
 the upper limit of quantitative discrimination of the method for a liquid to solid ratio of 10. Even for
 Rd values in the range 0.1–1 m3/kg, the upper tail of the formally calculated uncertainty distribution is
 inflated and possibly not physically meaningful. For this reason, any reported Rd values greater than
 1 m3/kg should be considered suspect for the given liquid to solid ratio. This, of course, does not mean
 that the Rd cannot physically be larger than 1 m3/kg, but rather that such large Rd values are frequently
 not possible to quantify to an acceptable degree of accuracy.
 The reason for the very high Rd values obtained for OL1, OL2A, and OL2B rock types, however,
 can be traced to the excessive precision with which the S(%) values for these rocks are tabulated in
 /Kulmala et al. 1998/. In the original data set, the sorption percentages are specified with five digit
 precision and without error estimates (the sorption percentages reported range from 99.982% to
 99.997%). Although error estimates aren’t given, the specified number of significant figures implies
 a standard error of no more than about 0.001%. Using these values gives very large Rd estimates
 with highly inflated upper tails of their uncertainty distributions. Since such large values appear to
 be an artefact of the estimation procedure using excessively precise S(%) values, these data sets are
 neglected from subsequent calculations for oxic conditions.


                1
                     Oxic conditions
               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6

                                                                                   OL1
               0.5                                                                 OL2A
                                                                                   OL2B
               0.4                                                                 Ro1A
                                                                                   Ro1B
               0.3                                                                 Ro1C
                                                                                   Ki4A
               0.2                                                                 Ki4B
                                                                                   YT5-1
               0.1                                                                 YT5-3
                                                                                   YT5-2
                0
               1.00E-02           1.00E-01   1.00E+00       1.00E+01   1.00E+02      1.00E+03
                                                   Rd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure K-1. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Pu sorption under oxic conditions, based on literature Rd data
 and presented as an empirical cumulative distribution function for rocks taken from Finnish investigation
 sites. The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-estimated from tabulated sorption
 percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distributions plotted in the figure.




 188                                                                                                 R-10-48
                1
                     Anoxic conditions
               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6

                                                                                 OL1
               0.5
                                                                                 OL2A
                                                                                 OL2B
               0.4                                                               Ro1A
                                                                                 Ro1B
               0.3                                                               Ro1C
                                                                                 Ki4A
               0.2                                                               Ki4B
                                                                                 YT5-1
                                                                                 YT5-3
               0.1
                                                                                 YT5-2

                0
               1.00E-02          1.00E-01   1.00E+00       1.00E+01   1.00E+02           1.00E+03
                                                  Rd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure K-2. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Pu sorption under anoxic conditions, based on literature Rd
 data and presented as an empirical cumulative distribution function for rocks taken from Finnish investiga-
 tion sites. The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-estimated from tabulated sorption
 percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distributions plotted in the figure.


 Although the same argumentation could be used to remove the corresponding data for these rock
 types under anoxic conditions, the lower degree of precision with which the sorption percentages
 are reported and the fact that numerical error estimates are given (sorption percentages range from
 99.0±0.1% to 99.9±0.1%) suggests that these data might be more reliable.
 As noted previously for Np sorption (Appendix G), the marked differences in BET surface area and
 CEC reported for the fresh, weathered, and altered samples of Rapakivi granite do not appear to
 translate into corresponding shifts in sorptivity. The sorptivity of these three rock types as reported
 by /Huitti et al. 1996/ appears to be very similar. As previously, the data sets for the weathered and
 altered rock have been disregarded since the BET surface areas and CEC values would otherwise
 imply unrealistic transfer factors giving excessively low Kd estimates for application conditions.


 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 Based on the reported BET surface areas and CEC data, mechanical damage and CEC transfer factors
 have been estimated for each rock type. These transfer factors are summarised in Table K-2. Although
 Pu has not been conclusively shown to associate preferentially (or not) with biotite, CEC transfer
 factors have been assumed to be relevant for extrapolation to site specific conditions by appealing to
 arguments of caution. The CEC of all rock types studied by /Huitti et al. 1996, Kulmala et al. 1998/
 are higher than for Forsmark specific rock types which implies a slight downward shift of recom-
 mended Kd values.
 Since the BET surface areas of the crushed rock used in the experiments are supplied without error
 estimates, the uncertainty of fm is dominated by the uncertainty of the surface area of the Forsmark
 site specific rock. Using the fm and fcec transfer factors, estimated K 0d values were calculated. Rock
 types OL1, OL2A, and OL2B have been discounted from the oxic data set for the reasons outlined
 previously. The weathered and altered Rapakivi granites, YT5-2 and YT5-3 have been excluded
 from both oxic and anoxic data sets on the basis that they may not extrapolate well to Forsmark
 site-specific rock types.




 R-10-48                                                                                                  189
 Table K-2. Mechanical damage and CEC transfer factors estimated for rock types reported by
 /Huitti et al. 1996, Kulmala et al. 1998/ assuming Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057)
 as the target rock type (Aref = 0.018±0.005 m2/g, CEC = 1.0±0.5 cmol/kg) and propagation of 2σ
 error estimates in the uncertainty calculations.

 Rock type                                  log10 fm          log10 fcec

 OL1 (mica gneiss)                          –1.78±0.23        –0.27±0.42
 OL2A (granodiorite/tonalite)               –1.15±0.23        –0.44±0.40
 OL2B (granodiorite/granite)                –1.36±0.23        –0.37±0.41
 Ro1A (tonalite)                            –1.25±0.23        –0.37±0.41
 Ro1B (granite/leukotonalite)               –1.17±0.23        –0.38±0.39
 Ro1C (mica gneiss)                         –1.06±0.23        –0.20±0.44
 Ki4A (porhyritic granite)                  –1.13±0.23        –0.15±0.45
 Ki4B (porhyritic granodiorite) –1.15±0.23                    –0.42±0.37
 YT5-1 (granite)                            –1.29±0.23        –0.10±0.43




 Owing to the large uncertainties associated with the transfer factors, the individual K 0d values
 and their uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying
 lognormal distributions, now including the additional uncertainty of the fm and fcec transfer factors.
 The resulting, translated and expanded uncertainty distribution for K 0d is shown in Figure K-3 for
 oxic conditions and Figure K-4 for anoxic conditions.


                1
                     Oxic conditions
               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4                                                                               Ro1A
                                                                                                 Ro1B
               0.3
                                                                                                 Ro1C
                                                                                                 Ki4A
               0.2
                                                                                                 Ki4B
               0.1                                                                               YT5-1

                0
               1.00E-05          1.00E-04              1.00E-03            1.00E-02   1.00E-01      1.00E+00

                                                             Kd (m /kg)
                                                                  0   3



 Figure K-3. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Pu sorption under oxic conditions based on literature Rd
 data. Mechanical damage and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fcec) have been considered in the estimation
 procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB
 rock code 101057) under in situ conditions, resampled and presented as an empirical cumulative distribu-
 tion function.




 190                                                                                                           R-10-48
                1
                         Anoxic conditions
               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6

                                                                                              OL1
               0.5
                                                                                              OL2A

               0.4                                                                            OL2B
                                                                                              Ro1A
               0.3                                                                            Ro1B
                                                                                              Ro1C
               0.2                                                                            Ki4A
                                                                                              Ki4B
               0.1                                                                            YT5-1

                 0
               1.00E-04             1.00E-03             1.00E-02       1.00E-01   1.00E+00     1.00E+01
                                                               Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure K-4. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Pu sorption under anoxic conditions based on literature Rd
 data. Mechanical damage and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fcec) have been considered in the estimation
 procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB
 rock code 101057) under in situ conditions, resampled and presented as an empirical cumulative distribu-
 tion function.


 Redox speciation of Pu under laboratory conditions
 Pu is redox sensitive and can exist in as many as four different oxidation states in groundwater (i.e.,
 +III, +IV, +V, +VI). Pu is a very special case amongst the radionuclides owing to its complex redox
 speciation and since it is possible for several different redox species to co-exist simultaneously. Indeed
 there are a number of so-called “triple points” where up to three different redox forms can be present
 in equimolar amounts at equilibrium for a given pH and Eh. Under certain conditions (typically close
 to the triple points), redox disproportionation reactions can occur which give rise to mixed redox states
 /Langmuir 1997/. Some examples of such reactions are:
       (V)                          (VI)          (IV)
                     +       +
                                                                    						(K-1)
 2PuO + 4H           2              PuO + Pu 4+ + 2H 2 O
                                             2+
                                             2

    (IV)                            (III)         (VI)
               4+
                                                                    						(K-2)
 3Pu + 2H 2 O                       2Pu + PuO 2+
                                             3+
                                              2 +4H
                                                    +



 In the laboratory investigations described by /Huitti et al. 1996/ and /Kulmala et al. 1998/, pH and
 Eh measurements were made on the contact solutions at the conclusion of the anoxic experiments.
 In summary, the following results were obtained:
 •             For the LPVA2 (Hästholmen) groundwater used by /Huitti et al. 1996/, the Eh was typically found
               to be in the range –42 mV to +1 mV with a pH ranging from 7.2 to 8.4 after a contact time of
               73 days. The reducing capacity of the initial groundwater was reported as 0.7 mg/l (KMnO4).
 •             For the OLKR5 (Olkiluoto) groundwater used by /Kulmala et al. 1998/, the Eh was typically
               found to be in the range –428 mV to –138 mV with a pH ranging from 7.9 to 8.6. The reducing
               capacity of the initial groundwater was reported as 80 mg/l (KMnO4).
 •             For the RoKR4 (Romuvaara) groundwater used by /Kulmala et al. 1998/, the Eh was typically
               found to be in the range –358 mV to –144 mV with a pH ranging from 9.1 to 9.7. The reducing
               capacity of the initial groundwater was reported as 2.8 mg/l (KMnO4).
 •             For the KiKR4 (Kivetty) groundwater used by /Kulmala et al. 1998/, the Eh was typically found
               to be in the range –361 mV to –235 mV with a pH ranging from 9.1 to 9.8. The reducing capacity
               of the initial groundwater was reported as 2.9 mg/l (KMnO4).

 R-10-48                                                                                                   191
Owing to the low concentration of redox species in the low ionic strength groundwaters RoKR4 and
KiKR4, some of the samples were spiked with Tc(VII) as an internal standard to verify that sufficiently
reducing conditions were obtained for sorption of reduced Tc(IV) to occur. This was motivated on
account of the fact that electrode-based Eh measurements can be inaccurate for waters of low reducing
capacity. The sorption of Tc was consistent with this process and the authors therefore concluded that
the Eh in each of these cases was likely to be no more than about –150 mV to –50 mV. Although an
internal standard was not employed in /Huitti et al. 1996/, the LPVA2 groundwater was pronounced
reducing with regard to Tc(IV)/Tc(VII) redox speciation in parallel experiments investigating Tc sorption.
Using the initial groundwater compositions specified in the references, the redox speciation of Pu was
calculated with the aid of PHREEQC and the SKB-TDB /Duro et al. 2006/ thermodynamic database
for a span of Eh values ranging from –400 mV to +750 mV. The results of these calculations are
shown in Figure K-5.
Assuming an ambient partial pressure of oxygen ranging between 10–6 and 0.21 atm, the experiments
carried out under oxic conditions appear to be indicative of Pu(V) or Pu(VI) sorption (blue shaded
regions in Figure K-5), although the overlap of the predominance regions of the pentavalent and
hexavalent forms means that the sorption measurements most likely reflect a mixed redox state. For
anoxic conditions the speciation of Pu appears to be dominated by the trivalent form for OLKR5,
RoKR4, and KiKR4 groundwaters, and the tetravalent state dominates for LPVA2 groundwater. It



                                   LPVA2 (anoxic)                                               OLKR5 (anoxic)


                           LPVA2 (oxic)                                                 OLKR5 (oxic)




                                                                              Pu (IV)
          Pu (IV)
                                         Pu (V)
                                                                                                     Pu (V)


                         Pu (III)
                                                   Pu (VI)                         Pu (III)


                                                                                                                  Pu (VI)




                     Pu (IV)                                            Pu (IV)
                                    RoKR4 (anoxic)


                           RoKR4 (oxic)                                                      KiKR4 (oxic)

                                                                                        KiKR4 (anoxic)




                                         Pu (V)                                                       Pu (V)



                        Pu (III)                                                  Pu (III)

                                                  Pu (VI)                                                   Pu (VI)




Figure K-5. Pu redox speciation as a function of Eh (mV) for the different groundwaters used in laboratory
experiments assuming fixed pH and carbonate concentration levels equal to specified starting values for each
groundwater. Grey-red shading represents ranges of reported Eh values measured under anoxic conditions;
blue shading represents approximate Eh ranges expected for ambient conditions; green shading represents
upper and lower stability limits for water. The vertical broken lines represent the theoretical Eh calculated
by PHREEQC for the specified groundwater compositions (blue) and assuming redox control by the Fe2+/
Fe(OH)3 redox pair (red).




192                                                                                                                         R-10-48
should be noted, however, that the calculations are only very approximate in that they only consider
the speciation in the aqueous phase and no consideration is given to the possibility of pH and carbon-
ate compositional drift during the experiments. An additional uncertainty is the accuracy with which
the Eh can be measured since the assumption of redox control by the Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox pair would,
at least in some cases, suggest slightly different equilibrium Eh values (as shown in Figure K-5).
By comparing the thermodynamic constants for Pu3+ and Pu4+ hydrolysis in the SKB thermodynamic
database, it appears likely that the tetravalent form might sorb more strongly than the trivalent form
(inner-sphere surface complexes). This raises an intriguing possibility with regard to sorption in a
system where a mixed redox state characterises the redox speciation in the groundwater: The stronger
sorption of the tetravalent form would imply a depletion of Pu(IV) in the aqueous phase relative to
Pu(III) concentration. If the Eh of the groundwater was controlled by another redox pair and the Pu is
present at trace concentration levels (i.e. Pu does not significantly influence the Eh itself), the aqueous
phase speciation might then adjust to re-establish the original proportion of Pu(III) and Pu(IV) as
required by the controlling redox couple. Assuming all other things being equal this would logically
lead to further sorption of Pu(IV) and depletion of the aqueous phase. Based on this reasoning, it could
be argued that any mismatch between Pu(III) and Pu(IV) sorption strength would necessarily lead to
the sorptive retention of Pu in the more strongly sorbing form, which in this case appears to be Pu(IV).
Although spectroscopic studies using XANES techniques have been used to distinguish the speciation
of sorbed Pu on geological minerals (e.g. /Duff et al. 1999/), there appear to be no spectroscopic
studies that would directly support the hypothesis outlined above. The situation is also complicated
by the possibility that the mineral surfaces themselves might promote oxidation of Pu(III) to Pu(IV)
as has been observed to occur in the case of Ce(III) and Ce(IV) sorption /Duff 2001/.


Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
If it is assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to groundwater composition are internalised
in the individual data sets shown in Figure K-3 and Figure K-4 (noting that redox state as it relates to
oxic and anoxic conditions is treated as a separate variable), a recommended range of Kd values for
application conditions can be defined by aggregating the data sets together. The relevant Kd ranges
for application in SR-Site are given in Figure K-6.
Under oxic conditions, it is not possible to distinguish between the pentavalent, Pu(V) and hexavalent,
Pu(VI) states and therefore the Kd under these conditions is assumed to be representative of both
redox forms. For anoxic conditions, the Eh values measured during the sorption experiments indicate
a possible dominance of the trivalent form in the aqueous phase, although there is sufficient uncer-
tainty that it is not really possible to say with certainty whether Pu(III) or Pu(IV) is the dominant
redox form. Based on the hydrolysis constants for Pu(III) and Pu(IV), however, it is suspected that
Pu might be sorbed mainly in the tetravalent state even if the Pu present in the aqueous phase is
mostly trivalent. Owing to this uncertainty and since there is relatively good data already existing for
the trivalent actinides and lanthanides, it is assumed that the laboratory measurement data obtained
under anoxic conditions is approximately representative of Pu(IV) sorption.
It appears that the redox conditions prevailing at repository depth under application conditions (see
next section) are sufficiently reducing for Pu(III) to be the predominant redox form. Since the labora-
tory measurements possibly represent mixed redox states, the Kd for Pu(III) is assumed by analogy
to be the same as that derived for other trivalent actinides and lanthanides. The literature data based
Kd value for Pu under anoxic conditions is assumed as an analogue for the tetravalent radionuclides
Np(IV), Tc(IV), U(IV), Th(IV). Although this might not be entirely correct, the choice is cautious
since the site specific data for Am(III)/Eu(III) suggest slightly lower Kd values for Pu(III) than those
derived from the literature data for Pu under anoxic conditions.




R-10-48                                                                                                193
                1
                          Oxic conditions
                          lognormal fit (oxic conditions)
               0.9
                          Anoxic conditions
               0.8        lognormal fit (anoxic conditions)


               0.7

                                            log10 Kd = -2.04±0.60




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5
                                                                               log10 Kd = -1.28±0.65

               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                 0
               1.00E-05   1.00E-04           1.00E-03          1.00E-02    1.00E-01        1.00E+00    1.00E+01
                                                              Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure K-6. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Pu sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.


 Assessment of predominant redox state under application
 groundwater conditions
 In order to ascertain the principal redox state of Pu under application groundwater conditions, the
 speciation of Pu was calculated for 20,000 randomly sampled groundwater compositions taken from
 the SR-Site temperate domain simulations /Salas et al. 2010/. The calculations were made for the
 prevailing groundwater chemistry at time 2,000 y, 3,000 y, 5,000 y, and 9,000 y using PHREEQC and
 consider the same redox controlling processes as discussed previously for Np sorption (Appendix G).
 In addition to calculating the actual speciation of Pu in the application groundwater, sweep calculations
 were made for a range of hypothetical redox potentials to ascertain the location of the transition point
 where Pu(III,IV) gives way to Pu(V,VI) dominated redox speciation. The transition point is taken to
 be where the sum of trivalent and tetravalent species is equal to the sum of pentavalent and hexavalent
 species. For numerical reasons this was done only for the convex hull of data points describing the
 envelope of pH and total carbonate concentrations in the application groundwater. From these data,
 a plane of best fit can then be calculated for the transition point which can be shown to be valid for
 all groundwater compositions within the convex hull. This provides a visual means of ascertaining
 how close the system is to the point of transition between predominantly reduced and predominantly
 oxidised speciation. The redox parameter space calculated in this fashion is plotted in Figure K-7 for
 the groundwater compositions existing at 2,000 y in the temperate case groundwater simulations.
 Although the location of the plane of best fit roughly demarcates the regions of Pu(III,IV) and
 Pu(V,VI) predominance, it does not show the full extent of the region where multiple reducing and
 oxidising species can co-exist. The redox sweep data are therefore plotted in Figure K-8 where the
 fraction of reduced Pu (i.e. the sum of trivalent and tetravalent forms) is plotted as a function of
 redox potential.
 There is a general tendency for the redox potential to decrease over time in the SR-Site temperate
 domain simulations due to the freshening of the groundwater with a meteoric component of higher
 carbonate content. The corresponding simulation results for groundwater compositions existing at
 9,000 y are plotted in Figure K-9 and Figure K-10. It is noted that the groundwater redox potentials
 are sufficiently low for Pu(III) to be assumed as the dominant redox species for SR-Site transport
 simulations (cf. Figure K-5).


 194                                                                                                              R-10-48
  Figure K-7. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater
  compositions at 2,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO4–2/FeSam redox couple. The calcula-
  tions indicate that all sampled groundwater compositions are sufficiently reducing for Pu(III) to be the
  dominant redox species (min and max Eh range indicated by green and blue coloured outline rectangles).
  The theoretical transition region separating reducing conditions (Pu(III,IV) predominance) and oxidising
  conditions (Pu(V,VI) predominance) is indicated by the red plane (red markers are mapped to the plane at
  the same pH and carbonate coordinates as the actual groundwater compositions for reference purposes).


                        Fully Reducing conditions, Pu(III,IV)       Transition region, Pu(III,IV,V,VI)   Fully oxidising conditions, Pu(V,VI)
                                                                    (depends on pH and HCO3-)

                       1


                      0.9


                      0.8


                      0.7




fraction Pu(III,IV)
                      0.6


                      0.5


                      0.4


                      0.3


                      0.2


                      0.1


                       0
                        -400             -200                   0            200                400            600              800

                                                                         Eh (mV)

  Figure K-8. Theoretical redox transition zone for Pu (blue shaded region) compared with redox conditions
  in SR-Site temperate case at 2,000 y (dark green shaded region) which encompasses the potential span of
  both the Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The light green and red shaded areas represent fully reducing
  (100% Pu(III,IV)) and fully oxidising (100% Pu(V,VI)) conditions, respectively. The cross-hairs in the figure
  approximately indicate the centroid of the transition point for the application groundwater pH and carbonate
  ranges illustrated previously in Figure K-7.




  R-10-48                                                                                                                                       195
  Figure K-9. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater
  compositions at 9,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO4–2/FeSam redox couple. The calcula-
  tions indicate that all sampled groundwater compositions are sufficiently reducing for Pu(III) to be the
  dominant redox species (min and max Eh range indicated by green and blue coloured outline rectangles).
  The theoretical transition region separating reducing conditions (Pu(III,IV) predominance) and oxidising
  conditions (Pu(V,VI) predominance) is indicated by the red plane (red markers are mapped to the plane at
  the same pH and carbonate coordinates as the actual groundwater compositions for reference purposes).


                      Fully Reducing conditions, Pu(III,IV)   Transition region, Pu(III,IV,V,VI)   Fully oxidising conditions, Pu(V,VI)
                                                              (depends on pH and HCO3-)
                       1


                      0.9


                      0.8


                      0.7




fraction Pu(III,IV)
                      0.6


                      0.5


                      0.4


                      0.3


                      0.2


                      0.1


                       0
                       -400            -200              0              200             400             600             800
                                                                   Eh (mV)

  Figure K-10. Theoretical redox transition zone for Pu (blue shaded region) compared with redox condi-
  tions in SR-Site temperate case at 2,000 y (dark green shaded region) which encompasses the potential
  span of both the Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The light green and red shaded areas represent fully
  reducing (100% Pu(III,IV)) and fully oxidising (100% Pu(V,VI)) conditions, respectively. The cross-hairs
  in the figure approximately indicate the centroid of the transition point for the application groundwater pH
  and carbonate ranges illustrated previously in Figure K-9.




  196                                                                                                                                     R-10-48
                                                                                             Appendix L

 Kd data derivation sheet for protactinium (Pa)
 Overview of available literature data
 The most detailed data sets for sorption of protactinium on relevant rock types and groundwaters
 are documented by /Kulmala et al. 1996/ and /Huitti et al. 1996/. In these studies, sorption was
 measured on crushed rock taken from various sites in Finland. The sorption experiments were carried
 out under both oxic and anoxic conditions using natural groundwater samples native to the various
 sites and a liquid to solid ratio of 10 ml/g. For experiments carried out under anoxic conditions, the
 sampled groundwater was preserved in a nitrogen atmosphere to prevent oxidation of the Fe(II) content
 of the water. Spike concentrations of Pa(V) were in the range 10–13–10–10 M for both oxic and anoxic
 experiments. Material properties of the rock samples and groundwaters used are the same as those
 discussed previously for Pu sorption (Appendix K). There are other data sets in the open literature for
 Pa sorption, notably /Berry et al. 1989/ for sorption on Caledonian granite and /Baston et al. 1999/ for
 a Japanese granodiorite. These data were deemed of lesser quality owing to the lack of supporting data
 documentation and therefore have not been used.
 The data compiled by /Kulmala et al. 1996/ and /Huitti et al. 1996/ are estimated in terms of the
 percentage sorbed, S(%) calculated with the aid of a radiometric mass balance. The actual Rd data in
 the references are given without error estimates and in some cases reported as “≥” a specified value
 owing to detection limit issues. In order to obtain numerical ranges of Kd including uncertainty
 estimates, the procedures outlined in Appendix C were used. Since there are only a small number of
 Rd values for each rock type, re-sampling of the Rd values and their associated errors allows a more
 realistic range of data uncertainty to be estimated. Since there were no major differences between the
 data ranges obtained under oxic and anoxic conditions, the data for both sets of experiments were
 pooled. The composite distribution of Rd values obtained for each rock type is shown in Figure L-1.


                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6
                                                                               OL1
               0.5                                                             OL2A
                                                                               OL2B
                                                                               Ro1A
               0.4
                                                                               Ro1B
                                                                               Ro1C
               0.3                                                             Ki4A
                                                                               Ki4B
               0.2                                                             YT5-1
                                                                               YT5-3
               0.1                                                             YT5-2
                                                                               Pa1
                0
               1.00E-02   1.00E-01   1.00E+00           1.00E+01    1.00E+02           1.00E+03

                                           Rd (m /kg)
                                                0   3



 Figure L-1. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Pa(V) sorption based on literature Rd data and presented as
 an empirical cumulative distribution function for rocks taken from Finnish investigation sites (data are
 pooled for oxic and anoxic conditions). The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-
 estimated from tabulated sorption percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distributions
 plotted in the figure.




 R-10-48                                                                                               197
 As can be seen from Figure L-1, there is an additional rock type (Pa1) which was not previously
 documented in Appendix K. This is mica gneiss rock type taken from the Palmottu natural analogue
 study site and is known to also contain pyrite. This data set has been included here for reference
 purposes although has not been subsequently used for deriving site specific Kd values owing to that
 no BET surface area data were documented for these samples.


 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 Based on the reported BET surface area data, mechanical damage transfer factors were estimated
 for each rock type. These transfer factors are the same as those previously summarised in Table K-2.
 Redox speciation calculations using PHREEQC indicate that Pa(V) should be present under all con-
 ceivable field conditions and therefore the tendency for redox sensitive nuclides to sorb on biotite with
 accompanying redox transformation does not seem to apply in particular this case. Therefore, unlike
 the sorption of some of the other redox sensitive solutes, there appears to be no good reason to suspect
 that Pa should sorb preferentially on biotite and so a CEC transfer factor has not been used.
 As noted previously, the uncertainty of the mechanical damage transfer factor, fm is dominated by
 the uncertainty of the estimated surface area of the Forsmark site specific rock since the BET surface
 areas of the crushed rock used in the experiments are supplied without error estimates. Using the
 fm transfer factors, estimated K 0d values were calculated for the original data points. For the same
 reasons outlined previously, the weathered and altered Rapakivi granites, YT5-2 and YT5-3 have
 been excluded on the basis that they do not extrapolate well to Forsmark site-specific rock types.
 Owing to the large uncertainties associated with the mechanical damage transfer factor, the individual
 K 0d and their uncertainties were re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying
 lognormal distributions including the additional uncertainty of the fm transfer factor. The resulting,
 expanded uncertainty distribution for K 0d is shown in Figure L-2.


                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5                                                           OL1
                                                                             OL2B
               0.4                                                           OL2A
                                                                             Ro1A
               0.3                                                           Ro1B
                                                                             Ro1C
               0.2
                                                                             Ki4A
                                                                             Ki4B
               0.1
                                                                             YT5-1

                0
               1.00E-03   1.00E-02          1.00E-01           1.00E+00              1.00E+01

                                         Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure L-2. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Pa sorption based on literature Rd data (data are pooled
 for oxic and anoxic conditions). Only the mechanical damage transfer factor, fm has been considered in
 the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark
 metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions, resampled and presented as an empirical
 cumulative distribution function.




 198                                                                                               R-10-48
 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 If it is assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to groundwater composition are internalised
 in the individual data sets shown in Figure L-2, a recommended range of Kd values for application
 conditions can be defined by aggregating the data sets together. The relevant Kd range for application
 in SR-Site are given in Figure L-3. Since redox speciation calculations indicate that Pa(V) should be
 present under all projected groundwater compositions, Pa is not considered to be redox sensitive.


                1
                          All groundwater compositions
               0.9
                          lognormal fit to data

               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5

                                                                       log10Kd= -1.23±0.48
               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-03                       1.00E-02                1.00E-01               1.00E+00
                                                         Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure L-3. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Pa(V) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.




 R-10-48                                                                                                199
                                                                                                                      Appendix M

Kd data derivation sheet for radium (Ra)
Overview and evaluation of site investigation data
Site specific sorption data were obtained for Ra(II) during the site investigations at Forsmark /Byegård
et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/. These data are summarised in the bedrock transport
properties site descriptive model /Crawford 2008/ and are the basis for Kd values recommended
for use in SR-Site. In most cases (although there are some exceptions) there is a time dependency
in the experimental data with a clear trend towards higher Rd values at increasing times. The data
also exhibit a relatively clear surface area dependency whereby smaller crushed particle sizes are
associated with higher sorptivities than larger size fractions. A typical time series for Ra(II) sorption
on Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) is shown in Figure M-1.
As was noted for a number of other solutes studied in the site investigation work, there is an inflection
in the slope of the temporal trend at 91 days as shown in Figure M-1. It is possible that this is related
to an inaccurately estimated blank solution activity error since it appears in all three size-fraction data
series. The existence of similar deviations in the data recorded for several solutes suggests the error
might be possibly due to either operator error involving weighing of samples or some inaccuracy in
calibration of the radiometric counting device used to measure activity on that particular day.
The Forsmark data are based on samples taken from two borehole sections while the Laxemar data
are based on a single borehole section. For the same reasons outlined previously for Cs(I), no attempt
has been made to model the time dependency of the data. The data for Ra(II) have therefore been
treated by considering the data set in its entirety without filtering of values on the basis of crushed
size fraction or contact time.


              0.1
                         Ra(II), Saline_Fm (mean of triplicate samples)




Rd (m3/kg)   0.01




                                                                                1-2 mm size fraction

                                                                                0.25-0.5 mm size fraction

                                                                                0.063-0.125 mm size fraction

             0.001
                     1                               10                          100                           1000
                                                          contact time (days)

Figure M-1. Typical time series for Ra(II) sorption Rd (m3/kg) measured in the Forsmark site investigation
studies. There is a clear sorption dependency on both particle size and time.




R-10-48                                                                                                                      201
Overview of available literature data
The most detailed data sets for sorption of Ra(II) on relevant rock types and groundwaters are
documented by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/ and /Huitti et al. 1996/. In these studies, sorption was
measured on crushed rock taken from various sites in Finland. The sorption experiments described
by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/ were carried out using natural groundwater samples for a liquid to
solid ratio varying between 10–100 ml/g and a contact time of roughly 20 days. The spike concentra-
tion of Ra(II) was 2.7×10–10 M. The sorption experiments described by /Huitti et al. 1996/ also use
natural groundwater samples, a liquid to solid ratio of 10 ml/g, a contact time of 21 days, and a
Ra(II) spike concentration of £ 10–7 M. In the study by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/, the liquid to
solid ratio was varied to simulate the effect of a variable spike concentration. In /Huitti et al. 1996/,
on the other hand, the analogue solute Ba(II) was added at a concentration ranging between 10–7 M
and 10–3 M to simulate the effect of variable concentration. A summary of the material properties of
the rock samples and groundwaters used by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/ and /Huitti et al. 1996/ are
given in Table M-1.


Table M-1. Material properties of Finnish rock types investigated by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/
and /Huitti et al. 1996/. Means and standard deviations are given for multiple replicate samples
where available.

Sample               YT5-1           YT5-2               YT5-3

Type                 Fresh granite   Weathered granite   Altered granite
Source location      Hästholmen      Hästholmen          Hästholmen
Groundwater          LPVA2           LPVA2               LPVA2
Groundwater type     Saline          Saline              Saline
particle size (mm)   ≤ 2.0           ≤ 2.0               ≤ 2.0
ABET (m2/g)          0.31±0.01       3.51±1.94           1.0±0.12
CEC (cmol/kg)        1.01±0.28       3.7±0.17            1.7±0.17
Biotite (vol%)       3.8%            4.2%                1.4%
Hornblende (vol%)    5.2%            –                   –
Chlorite (vol%)      1.2%            12.4%               2.6%

Sample               OL-KR5a         RO-KR3a             KI-KR1a

Type                 Mica gneiss     Gneiss              Porphyric
                                                         granodiorite
Source location      Olkiluoto       Romuvaara           Kivetty
Groundwater          OLKR5           OLKR5               OLKR5
Groundwater type     Saline          Saline              Saline
particle size (mm)   ≤ 0.1           ≤ 0.1               ≤ 0.1
                     ≤ 2.0           ≤ 2.0               ≤ 2.0
ABET (m2/g)          2.97±0.02       1.73±0.02           1.98±0.01
                     0.79±0.01       0.17±0.01           0.18±0.01
CEC (cmol/kg)        10.2±0.4        17.8±0.1            7.7±0.5
Biotite (vol%)       20.9±2          17.4±0.3            11.4±2.8
Hornblende (vol%)    –               10.9±4.9            5.2±1.3
Chlorite (vol%)      –               ≤ 0.2               ≤ 0.2

                     OL-KR5b         RO-KR3b             KI-KR1b
Type                 Tonalite        Leukotonalite       Mica gneiss
Source location      Romuvaara       Romuvaara           Romuvaara
Groundwater          KiKR4           KiKR4               KiKR4
Groundwater type     Fresh           Fresh               Fresh
particle size (mm)   ≤ 0.1           ≤ 0.1               ≤ 0.1
                     ≤ 2.0           ≤ 2.0               ≤ 2.0
ABET (m2/g)          2.97±0.02       1.73±0.02           1.98±0.01
                     0.79±0.01       0.17±0.01           0.18±0.01
CEC (cmol/kg)        10.2±0.4        17.8±0.1            7.7±0.5
Biotite (vol%)       20.9±2          17.4±0.3            11.4±2.8
Hornblende (vol%)    –               10.9±4.9            5.2±1.3
Chlorite (vol%)      –               ≤ 0.2               ≤ 0.2




202                                                                                              R-10-48
 The data presented in both literature references are estimated in terms of the percentage sorbed, S(%)
 calculated with the aid of a radiometric mass balance. The actual Rd data in the references are given
 without error estimates and in some cases reported as “≥” a specified value owing to detection limit
 issues. In order to obtain numerical ranges of Kd including uncertainty estimates, the procedures
 outlined in Appendix C were used. Since there are only a small number of Rd values for each rock
 type, re-sampling of the Rd values and their associated errors allows a more realistic range of data
 uncertainty to be estimated. Only the data where additional Ba(II) has not been added are used in
 this report owing to the risk of barite precipitation which has a high potential to bias the results. The
 composite distribution of Rd values obtained for the different rock type and groundwater combinations
 are shown in Figure M-2.


 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 For Ra(II), a mixture of site data and literature data have been considered in the recommendation
 of Kd ranges for use in SR-Site safety assessment calculations. As described previously for Ni(II)
 sorption, the site investigation data are used mainly to establish the recommended Kd data while the
 Finnish literature data are used in a supporting role to provide a consistency check on the values
 derived from the site specific materials. The selection procedure and associated calculations are
 described separately since data handling procedures were different for the site investigation and
 literature data.
 One particular confounding factor regarding radium sorption is the possibility of barite precipitation
 accompanied by radiobarite solid solution formation. For this reason, only data sets where the ground­
 water composition was not likely to result in barite oversaturation were propagated further in the analysis.
 In order to ascertain the effect of barite precipitation, PHREEQC calculations were made using the
 specified groundwater compositions from the site investigation and literature data. Radiobarite solid
 solution equilibrium was modelled assuming ideal mixing behaviour which is not an unreasonable
 assumption considering the similar ionic radii of Ra (1.73 Å) and Ba (1.61 Å) and similarity in crystal
 lattices of RaSO4 and BaSO4 (e.g. /Zhu 2004/).


                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6

                                                                          OL-KR5 (Saline OL_GW)
               0.5
                                                                          RO-KR3 (Saline OL_GW)

               0.4                                                        KI-KR1 (Saline OL_GW)
                                                                          OL-KR5 (Fresh Ki_GW)
               0.3                                                        RO-KR3 (Fresh Ki_GW)
                                                                          KI-KR1 (Fresh Ki_GW)
               0.2
                                                                          YT5-1 (Saline LPVA2)
                                                                          YT5-2 (Saline LPVA2)
               0.1
                                                                          YT5-3 (Saline LPVA2)
                0
               1.00E-03   1.00E-02   1.00E-01    1.00E+00    1.00E+01   1.00E+02      1.00E+03

                                                Rd (m /kg)
                                                     3



 Figure M-2. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Ra sorption based on literature Rd data and presented as an
 empirical cumulative distribution function for rocks taken from Finnish investigation sites. The individual
 data points and their uncertainties have been re-estimated from tabulated sorption percentage data and
 then re-sampled to give the composite distributions plotted in the figure.




 R-10-48                                                                                                  203
Although linear sorption using the Kd approach cannot be modelled directly in PHREEQC, it is
possible to simulate linear sorption partitioning by defining a hypothetical surface complexation
reaction with a large excess of surface sites and an appropriately scaled equilibrium constant. The
apparent Rd value where radiobarite retention is erroneously lumped with sorption can then be
compared to the Rd value for the purely sorptive retention process. The results of this analysis are
shown in Figure M-3.
As can be seen from Figure M-3, the Fresh, Marine, and Type V groundwater types from the site
investigations and the LPVA2 groundwater from /Huitti et al. 1996/ were found to have a significant
potential for bias due to barite precipitation. None of the other groundwater types had sufficiently
high barium and sulphate concentrations to result in barite precipitation.


Site specific data from Forsmark and Laxemar
Since the sorption of Ra(II) appears to exhibit an ionic strength dependency, the procedure for deri-
vation of Kd values relevant for application within SR-Site consisted of the same steps as described
previously for Cs(I). Estimated K 0d data corrected for surface area normalisation, mechanical damage,
and CEC effects using Equation 5-2 are plotted in Figure M-4 assuming Forsmark metagranite (SKB
rock code 101057) as a representative rock type for the Forsmark site. Although the uncertainty ranges
for the individual data sets are large, there is a clear tendency towards greater sorptivity under low
ionic strength conditions relative to that obtained for the more saline groundwater types.


                      1.0E+00




                      1.0E-01




Rd apparent (m3/kg)
                      1.0E-02


                                                             Fresh (SDM)

                                                             Marine (SDM)

                      1.0E-03                                Type_V (Lx SDM)

                                                             LPVA2b (Saline)

                                                             LPVA2a (Saline)

                                                             null effect (all other groundwater types)
                      1.0E-04
                           1.0E-04   1.0E-03      1.0E-02                  1.0E-01                   1.0E+00
                                                Rd (m /kg)
                                                      3



Figure M-3. Theoretical impact of barite precipitation and accompanying radiobarite solid solution
formation on measured Rd values calculated using PHREEQC for the specified groundwater compositions.
The vertical axis shows the “apparent” Rd obtained where the solid solution effect is lumped together with
sorption, while the horizontal axis shows the “true” Rd value for sorption (ion-exchange) only.




204                                                                                                            R-10-48
                1
                          Brine (Forsmark)

               0.9        Saline (Forsmark)

                          Saline (Laxemar)
               0.8
                          Marine (Forsmark)
               0.7        Fresh (Laxemar)

                          Fresh (Forsmark)



CDF (% rank)
               0.6
                          Type V (Laxemar)
               0.5
                          minimum Kd

               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
                1.0E-06       1.0E-05         1.0E-04           1.0E-03   1.0E-02       1.0E-01
                                                    Kd (m /kg)
                                                        0   3



 Figure M-4. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Ra(II) sorption based on raw Rd data for site specific rock
 types and groundwater compositions as reported in the Forsmark (Fm SDM) and Laxemar (Lx SDM) site
 investigations. Surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fA, fm, and fcec)
 have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appro-
 priate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented as an
 empirical cumulative distribution function. A minimum Kd reference line is plotted in the figure indicating
 the upper 95% confidence limit for the matrix storage capacity of the rock based on water saturation porosity.


 Literature data for Finnish rock types
 Based on the reported BET surface areas and CEC data, mechanical damage and CEC transfer
 factors were estimated for each rock type (summarised in Table M-2). These transfer factors were
 then used to estimate re-scaled values for the individual data points in the raw data set. Owing to the
 low number of replicate samples the K 0d values and their uncertainties were re-sampled assuming
 a convex combination of the underlying lognormal distributions, now also including the additional
 uncertainty of the fm and fcec transfer factors. The data for the different rock types were pooled and
 the resulting rescaled and expanded uncertainty distributions for the three different groundwater
 types are shown in Figure M-5.


 Corrections for groundwater chemistry in SR-Site
 The theoretical Kd was calculated using PHREEQC and the SKB thermodynamic database for
 10,000 randomly selected groundwater compositions taken from the SR-Site temperate domain
 simulations /Salas et al. 2010/. The exchange model described in Section 5.1.1 was used assuming
 selectivity coefficients for Äspö diorite as a basis for calculations. Comparison of Kd values calculated
 in this manner with the corresponding theoretical result for the Forsmark saline reference water allows
 the groundwater chemistry transfer factor, fchem to be calculated in straight-forward fashion for the
 projected application conditions. Background concentrations of the components (Cs, Sr, Rb, and Ba)
 in the groundwater were estimated using correlations derived from the site investigation hydrochem-
 istry data. Full details concerning how these correlations were established and implemented can be
 found in Appendix A.
 Simulation results for fchem are given in Figure M-6 and indicate a slightly decreased Kd at early
 times relative to the reference groundwater. At longer times, however, the progressive freshening of
 the groundwater due to intrusion of a meteoric component gives elevated Kd values relative to the
 reference groundwater.


 R-10-48                                                                                                   205
 Table M-2. Mechanical damage and CEC transfer factors estimated for rock types used by
 /Kulmala and Hakanen 1995/ and /Huitti et al. 1996/ assuming Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock
 code 101057) as the target rock type (Aref = 0.018±0.005 m2/g, CEC = 1.0±0.5 cmol/kg) and propa-
 gation of 2 s error estimates in the uncertainty calculations.

 Rock type                Size fraction      log10 fm             log10 fcec

 OL-KR5                   < 0.1 mm           –2.28±0.23           –1.16±0.36
                          < 2 mm             –1.70±0.23           –1.16±0.36
 RO-KR3                   < 0.1 mm           –2.04±0.23           –1.40±0.36
                          < 2 mm             –1.03±0.23           –1.40±0.36
 KI-KR1                   < 0.1 mm           –2.10±0.23           –1.04±0.37
                          < 2 mm             –1.06±0.23           –1.04±0.37
 YT5-1                    < 2 mm             –1.29±0.23           –0.10±0.43



                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4
                                                                                                   LPVA2 Saline
                                                                                                   (Hästholmen)
               0.3
                                                                                                   Ki-KR4 Fresh
                                                                                                   (Kivetty)
               0.2                                                                                 OL-KR5 Saline
                                                                                                   (Olkiluoto)
               0.1                                                                                 minimum Kd


                0
                1.0E-06     1.0E-05       1.0E-04       1.0E-03    1.0E-02     1.0E-01   1.0E+00   1.0E+01      1.0E+02

                                                                  Kd (m /kg)
                                                                    0     3



 Figure M-5. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Ra(II) sorption based on literature Rd data. Mechanical
 damage and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fcec) have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw
 data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057)
 under in situ conditions and are presented as an empirical cumulative distribution function. A minimum
 Kd reference line is plotted in the figure indicating the upper 95% confidence limit for the matrix storage
 capacity of the rock based on water saturation porosity.




 206                                                                                                                      R-10-48
              1.5




                1

                                                         9000 y



              0.5


log10 fchem
                                                                         3000 y




                0

                                         5000 y


              -0.5

                                                                                         2000 y



               -1
                     -2   -1.8   -1.6    -1.4     -1.2     -1     -0.8   -0.6     -0.4       -0.2   0

                                            log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)
 Figure M-6. Chemistry transfer factors, fchem calculated for Ra(II) sorption at application groundwater
 conditions in the SR-Site temperate case. The plotted data represent 10,000 randomly selected groundwater
 compositions calculated individually using PHREEQC and the assumed ion exchange model. Data are
 given for 2,000 y (lime green markers), 3,000 y (dark green), 5,000 y (blue), 9,000 y (red). The cross-hairs
 in the figure represent the relative location of the reference groundwater (Forsmark saline).


 Using the calculated fchem distribution, it is possible to estimate Kd values appropriate for application
 groundwater compositions by convolution of the individual probability density functions or by using an
 equivalent stochastic method. The latter method being simpler to implement numerically was chosen
 and used to estimate the Kd values presented in this compilation. The stochastic method was based
 upon random sampling (105 samples) of the individual probability density functions and multiplication
 of the individually sampled values. The resulting distributions of Kd values are plotted in Figure M-7
 to Figure M-10 for different times during the temperate domain calculation cases.


 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 Based on the ion-exchange simulations described in the previous section, the following Kd ranges
 are recommended for use at different times in the hydrogeochemical evolution of the repository
 environment:
 log10 Kd ≈ –3.59±0.41                  (t = 2,000 y)						                                         (M-1)
 log10 Kd ≈ –3.62±0.41                  (t = 3,000 y)						                                         (M-2)
 log10 Kd ≈ –3.53±0.40                  (t = 5,000 y)						                                         (M-3)
 log10 Kd ≈ –3.25±0.54                  (t = 9,000 y)						                                         (M-4)
 As can be seen from the recommended data, the changing salinity profile of the repository environ-
 ment has only a weak impact on the Kd uncertainty distribution, with a tendency to towards slightly
 higher sorptivities with time. Since it is not possible to consider temporally variable Kd values in
 safety assessment calculations, the time period giving the lowest Kd value is recommended to be used
 for calculations. This corresponds to the groundwater conditions existing at 3,000 y. Generally the
 numerically calculated Kd uncertainties were found to be lognormally distributed with the exception of
 9,000 y where the fitted lognormal distribution doesn’t fully capture the positive skew of the data set.
 The Kd uncertainty distributions are plotted in Figure M-11 as cumulative distribution functions (CDF).


 R-10-48                                                                                                    207
                   1

                          (signifies measurement data possibly compromised by barite co-precipitation)

                   0

                                                                                                  LPVA2 


                  -1




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                  -2
                                                    
                                                                                                Marine (Fm) 
                                          Fresh (Fm/Lx)                     
                  -3
                                                                   Type V (Lx)
                                                                                                          Saline (Lx)

                                                                          Saline (Fm)
                  -4      Ki-KR4




                  -5                                                                          OL-KR5               Brine (Fm)




                  -6
                    -3             -2.5               -2         -1.5             -1             -0.5                   0       0.5
                                                           log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure M-7. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Ra(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 2,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


                   1

                            (signifies measurement data possibly compromised by barite co-precipitation)


                   0

                                                                                                  LPVA2      
                  -1




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                  -2
                                                                                              Marine (Fm) 

                                          Fresh (Fm/Lx)                     
                  -3
                                                                   Type V (Lx)
                                                                                                          Saline (Lx)

                                                                          Saline (Fm)
                  -4      Ki-KR4




                  -5                                                                          OL-KR5               Brine (Fm)




                  -6
                    -3             -2.5               -2          -1.5            -1             -0.5                   0       0.5
                                                           log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure M-8. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Ra(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 3,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


208                                                                                                                                   R-10-48
                    1
                               (signifies measurement data possibly compromised by barite co-precipitation)
                          

                    0
                                                                                                 LPVA2        
                   -1




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                   -2
                                                                                            Marine (Fm)
                                                                                                               
                                       Fresh (Fm/Lx)                         
                   -3
                                                                   Type V (Lx)
                                                                                                         Saline (Lx)

                                                                           Saline (Fm)
                   -4      Ki-KR4




                   -5                                                                          OL-KR5               Brine (Fm)




                   -6
                     -3             -2.5               -2         -1.5             -1             -0.5                 0         0.5
                                                            log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure M-9. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Ra(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 5,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


                    1

                           (signifies measurement data possibly compromised by barite co-precipitation)

                    0

                                                                                                    LPVA2 


                   -1




log10 Kd (m3/kg)
                   -2
                                                   
                                                                                                 Marine (Fm) 
                                           Fresh (Fm/Lx)
                                                                             
                   -3
                                                                    Type V (Lx)
                                                                                                           Saline (Lx)

                                                                           Saline (Fm)
                   -4      Ki-KR4




                   -5                                                                           OL-KR5              Brine (Fm)




                   -6
                     -3             -2.5               -2         -1.5             -1             -0.5                   0       0.5
                                                            log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure M-10. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Ra(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic
axes. The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 9,000 y in the temperate case and
are plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors
for the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


R-10-48                                                                                                                                209
                                1


                               0.9

                                                 3000 y
                               0.8
                                                                                                     9000 y




Cumulative probability (CDF)
                               0.7


                               0.6                                                     5000 y


                               0.5


                               0.4

                                                                                 2000 y
                               0.3


                               0.2


                               0.1                                              Reference groundwater
                                                                                (Saline Forsmark)

                                0
                                     -5   -4.5     -4     -3.5         -3       -2.5            -2        -1.5   -1

                                                                 log10 Kd (m /kg)
                                                                            3



   Figure M-11. Uncertainty of recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Ra(II) sorption plotted as a cumulative
   probability distribution (CDF). The smooth curves represent the Kd values corrected for groundwater
   chemistry at different times during the temperate period. The jagged curve shows the original Kd0 distribu-
   tion estimated for the reference groundwater (Forsmark saline).




   210                                                                                                                R-10-48
                                                                                                     Appendix N

 Kd data derivation sheet for selenium (Se)
 Overview and evaluation of available literature data
 The sorption of Se on granitic rock is poorly covered in the literature and there are only a small number
 of studies where data are given for relevant rock types and groundwater compositions. Some data are
 given by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ for Se sorption on granite using several different spike concentrations
 of Se, different ionic strengths, pH levels, and fulvic acid concentrations. Data are also reported by
 /Papelis 2001/ where pH dependent sorption edges were measured on granite in contact with variable
 ionic strength synthetic groundwater and for different spike concentrations of Se. The raw measure-
 ment data from both references are given in Figure N-1.
 In the study by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ sorption experiments were carried out under oxic conditions using
 a synthetic groundwater. The rock samples were crushed and sieved to give a particle size range of
 0.106–0.180 mm. Half of the measurements were made using synthetic water samples conditioned by
 28 days of pre-equilibration with the granite rock type being studied (Lac du Bonnet, Manitoba), while
 half were made using non-conditioned groundwater. The three groundwaters used in the experiments
 were non-saline to saline in character with ionic strengths of roughly 0.003 M, 0.025M, and 0.23 M,
 respectively. The pH was also adjusted to give initial pH values ranging from 7.0 to 9.0. The pH of
 the different contact solutions was measured at the conclusion of the experiments and found to be in
 the range 7.6–9.3. Different amounts of fulvic acid (specified as dissolved organic carbon, DOC) were
 added to the contact solutions ranging from 0 mg/l to 10 mg/l DOC.


                1
                          Ticknor - Synthetic data (0 mg/l DOC)
               0.9        Ticknor - raw data (1 mg/l DOC)

                          Ticknor - raw data (3 mg/l DOC)
               0.8
                          Ticknor - raw data (10 mg/l DOC)
               0.7        Papelis - raw data




CDF (% rank)
                          Minimum effective Kd
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-06    1.00E-05            1.00E-04       1.00E-03    1.00E-02   1.00E-01   1.00E+00

                                                             Rd (m /kg)
                                                                   3



 Figure N-1. Rd (m3/kg) values calculated for Se sorption based on literature data and presented as an
 empirical cumulative distribution function for granite in contact with synthetic groundwater representing
 different ionic strengths and different initial pH levels. Separate curves are given for different amounts of
 fulvic acid used in the experiments. The truncated shape of the empirical distribution for 1 mg/l and 3 mg/l
 DOC implies sorptivity below the detection limit and the data points are therefore excluded from the figure.
 An estimated normal distribution (labelled “synthetic data”) is shown for the baseline case of no fulvic
 acid since only a single value with an error estimate is given by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ in this instance.




 R-10-48                                                                                                    211
Rd values were estimated for a contact time of 28 days for a Se spike concentration ranging from
10–8 to10–4 M and a liquid to solid ratio of 40 ml/g. The Rd data are given without error estimates.
A total of 32 measurements were reported corresponding to different combinations of the experi-
mental design parameters including a small number of replicates. A baseline estimate of sorption
(Rd ≈ (3.6±0.7) ×10–3 m3/kg) in the absence of fulvic acid and for a spike concentration of roughly
10–8 M is also given in the reference although how many measurements the estimate is based is not
specified.
The data from /Papelis 2001/ consist of pH dependent sorption edges measured for finely crushed
Shoal granite (≤ 0.075 mm) in contact with water of variable ionic strength (0.01–1.0 M NaNO3) and
for Se concentrations in the range 10–6–10–5 M. The liquid to solid ratio used in the experiments was
100 ml/g. Sorption experiments were also performed for a synthetic groundwater roughly matching
the composition in a sampled borehole at the site. The ionic strength of the synthetic groundwater
was roughly 0.01 M. The contact water compositions used by /Papelis 2001/ are the same as
described previously for Pb(II) sorption (see Appendix F).


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
The measurement of Se sorption is complicated by the fact that it is redox sensitive and can exist in
Se(–II), Se(IV), and Se(VI) redox states. In the –II redox state it exists primarily as the HSe- anion.
In the +IV and +VI redox state, Se is predominantly speciated in oxyanion form (SeO 32–and SeO 42–,
respectively). All three redox states are expected to exhibit relatively weak sorption since they can
only bind to positively charged sorption sites.
As already outlined in Section 3.2.2, oxyanions should only sorb appreciably to minerals that have
a pH point of zero proton charge near the prevailing pH of the groundwater where non-negligible
proportions of positively charged binding sites might exist. The sorption of Se(IV,VI) has been
previously shown by /Jan et al. 2007, 2008/ to be associated with the leachable Fe fraction of granite
as assessed by sequential extraction. The easily leached Fe fraction in granite is most likely to take
the form of hematite microprecipitates associated with biotite. In this compilation it is assumed that
all three redox states exhibit similar sorptivity although /Jan et al. 2008/ find some evidence that
Se(VI) is possibly less sorptive than Se(IV). Under the oxic conditions of the sorption experiments
it is thought that predominance of the Se(IV) or Se(VI) redox state is most likely although it is not
possible to distinguish which.
The baseline (no fulvic acid) Rd value and its error estimate reported by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ are
assumed as a basis for calculations in this compilation since they appear to be the least ambiguous
with regard to the varied experimental parameters. The BET surface area of the crushed granite was
reported as 0.18±0.01 m2/g. Since only one particle size was used in the experiments, it was only
necessary to use a single transfer factor to extrapolate the data to Forsmark rock under in situ condi-
tions. The mechanical damage transfer factor, fm was therefore estimated to be:
log10 fm ≈ –1.06±0.23								                                                           (N-1)
The crushed granite used by /Papelis 2001/ was reported to have a BET surface area of 0.79 m2/g.
Since no error estimate was given for the BET surface area, it is not possible to make an estimate of
the uncertainty in this case. The mechanical damage transfer factor, fm was therefore estimated to be:
log10 fm ≈ –1.64									                                                               (N-2)
No CEC data are given for the granite used in either of the experiments. The iron content, however,
has been estimated to be roughly 2.17% by volume (as Fe2O3) for the granite studied by /Ticknor
et al. 1996/ and 1.91% (as FeO) for the granite described by /Papelis 2001/. Since Forsmark meta-
granite has an iron content of roughly 2.7% by volume (as Fe2O3) /Sandström and Stephens 2009/,
the CEC transfer factor, fcec can assumed to be approximately unity given that the true CEC can only
be guessed very approximately. It is also noted that the relative Fe content of the different rock types
would imply a slight upwards adjustment of the scaled Kd value for Forsmark metagranite in any
case. The neglection of CEC in this case therefore appears to be a cautious assumption.




212                                                                                              R-10-48
 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 Estimated K 0d values were calculated for Forsmark metagranite using the mechanical damage transfer
 factor only (fcec is neglected). If it is furthermore assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to
 variable groundwater composition are internalised in the data, this data can be deemed suitable for
 SR-Site application conditions. The recommended Kd range for use in SR-Site transport calculations
 is given in Figure N-2 and is based on the baseline Rd estimate given by /Ticknor et al. 1996/.
 Extrapolated Kd data derived from the raw data given by /Papelis 2001/ are also shown in the figure
 for comparative purposes.
 In the opinion of the present author, the sorption of Se is not sufficiently well quantified that an unequivo-
 cal recommendation can be given. Given that there are large uncertainties in the extrapolated data, a good
 argument could be made for expanding the error bounds of the recommended uncertainty distribution.
 To this end, three different cases are presented in Figure N-2 corresponding to 2σ, 4σ, and 8σ estimates
 of the initial measurement error specified by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ for the baseline Rd measurements.
 All three cases have the same median value (best estimate) although tails of varying size.
 Although the 8σ distribution covers a larger uncertainty interval, it appears to be a less appropriate
 choice since there is a risk that Kd might be overestimated in stochastic simulations (i.e. in the upper
 tail of the uncertainty distribution). The 2σ distribution, on the other hand, is likely to be underestimated
 on account of the small underlying data set. The 4σ estimate appears to be a more cautious choice since
 it does not give values significantly higher than the extrapolated empirical data set from /Papelis 2001/
 while at the same time giving a adequate range of uncertainty that is more likely to be representative.
 In spite of this recommendation, the data are highly uncertain and a case could also be made for the
 neglection of Se sorption on the grounds of caution. The impact of this uncertainty could, however,
 be tested as a sensitivity case study in safety assessment calculations if deemed necessary.


                1
                          Ticknor (corrected synthetic data, 2-sigma)
               0.9        Ticknor (corrected synthetic data, 4-sigma)

                          Ticknor (corrected synthetic data, 8-sigma)
               0.8
                          Papelis (corrected empirical data)

               0.7        Minimum effective Kd




CDF (% rank)
               0.6
                                                                                   log1 0Kd = -3.53±0.55
               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-07   1.00E-06       1.00E-05      1.00E-04         1.00E-03     1.00E-02       1.00E-01   1.00E+00
                                                               Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure N-2. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Se sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data range
 is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite (SKB
 rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the recommended lognormal distribution
 are indicated in the figure (4σ error estimate) and are based upon the data given by /Ticknor et al. 1996/. For
 comparative purposes, curves corresponding to the 2σ and 8σ cases are also drawn as well as a corrected
 empirical distribution for the data given by /Papelis 2001/.




 R-10-48                                                                                                                  213
                                                                                                 Appendix O

 Kd data derivation sheet for Tin (Sn)
 Overview and evaluation of available literature data
 The sorption of Sn on granitic rock is poorly covered in the literature and there appears to only one
 study by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ where data are given for relevant rock types and groundwater composi-
 tions. One other study by the same authors is acknowledged /Ticknor and McMurray 1996/, although
 the data appear to be of common origin.
 In the study by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ sorption experiments were carried out under oxic conditions
 using a synthetic groundwater. The rock samples were crushed and sieved to give particle size
 range of 0.106–0.180 mm. Half of the measurements were made using synthetic water samples
 conditioned by 28 days of pre-equilibration with the granite rock type being studied (Lac du Bonnet,
 Manitoba), while half were made using non-conditioned groundwater. The groundwaters used in the
 experiments were non-saline to saline in character with an ionic strength ranging from 0.003 M to
 0.23 M, respectively. The pH was also adjusted to give initial pH values of 7.0, 8.0, and 9.0 in the
 contact solutions. The pH of the different contact solutions was measured at the conclusion of the
 experiments and found to be in the range 7.6–9.3.
 Rd values were estimated for a contact time of 28 days for a Sn(IV) spike concentration of roughly
 10–8 M and a liquid to solid ratio of 40. The Rd data are given without error estimates. A total of
 32 measurements were reported for different ionic strengths and initial pH values, as well as two
 different dissolved concentrations of fulvic acid (1 mg/l and 10 mg/l). A baseline estimate of sorption
 (Rd ≈ –3.8±1.0 m3/kg) in the absence of fulvic acid is also given in the reference although it is not
 specified how many measurements the estimate is based on.


                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3
                                                                       Synthetic data (0 mg/l DOC)
               0.2
                                                                       Raw data (1 mg/l DOC)
               0.1
                                                                       Raw data (10mg/l DOC)

                0
               1.00E-02    1.00E-01             1.00E+00             1.00E+01               1.00E+02

                                              Rd (m /kg)
                                                    3



 Figure O-1. Rd (m3/kg) values calculated for Sn(IV) sorption based on literature data and presented as an
 empirical cumulative distribution function for Granite in contact with synthetic groundwater representing
 two different ionic strengths (Fresh and Saline) and three different initial pH levels (pH 7–9). Separate curves
 are given for different amounts of fulvic acid used in the experiments. An estimated normal distribution
 (labelled “synthetic data”) is shown for the baseline case of no fulvic acid since only a single value with
 an error estimate is given by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ in this instance.




 R-10-48                                                                                                      215
Since sorption in the presence of fulvic acid is not strictly relevant for sorption of Sn(IV) in the
repository environment, only the measurements carried out at the lower concentration level of fulvic
acid (1 mg/L DOC) have been considered thereby giving 16 measurements upon which to base the
recommendation for SR-Site. The author of this compilation considers the value derived for sorption
in the absence of fulvic acid, not sufficiently qualified to be used for this recommendation except as
a comparative estimate.
Although the inclusion of even low concentrations of fulvic acid is not ideal for the purposes of
data selection for SR-Site, in the absence of other reliable sources of sorption data it is thought that
the use of these data is defensible nonetheless since the presence of organic complexing agents is
expected to decrease the Rd value by way of competitive binding effects in solution.
Although /Ticknor et al. 1996/ developed a fitted parametric surface to the experimental design reflected
in the experimental parameters, the author of the present compilation does not consider the underlying
data set to be sufficiently well established statistically to be used in making Kd recommendations
for SR-Site. Since very little difference was noted between the Rd values reported for different ionic
strengths and pH values, the data set have therefore been considered as an aggregate set. The effect
of groundwater compositional uncertainty is thereby implicitly contained in the uncertainty range
derived for the recommended Kd in the aggregate set.


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
The Rd values reported by /Ticknor et al. 1996/ for 1 mg/l DOC (fulvic acid) are assumed as a basis
for calculations in this compilation for the reasons outlined in the previous section. The BET surface
area of the crushed granite was reported as 0.18±0.01 m2/g. Since only one particle size was used
in the experiments, it was only necessary to use a single transfer factor to extrapolate the data to
Forsmark rock under in situ conditions. The mechanical damage transfer factor, fm was therefore
estimated to be:
log10 fm ≈ –1.06±0.23								                                                             (O-1)
No CEC data are given for the granite used in the experiments, although the iron content (given
as Fe2O3) has been estimated to be roughly 2.17% by volume. Since Forsmark metagranite has an
iron content of roughly 2.7% by volume (Fe2O3) /Sandström and Stephens 2009/, the CEC transfer
factor, fcec is assumed to be approximately unity given that the CEC can only be guessed very
approximately. Although there is no evidence to suggest for or against preferential sorption of Sn(IV)
with biotite, its general insensitivity to the expected range of groundwater redox conditions would
suggest that CEC effects can possibly be neglected in any case. Since no error estimates were speci-
fied for the original raw data, only the error estimate of the mechanical damage transfer factor was
propagated through the calculations to give the recommended distribution for SR-Site. The overall
uncertainty is therefore possibly underestimated.


Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
Estimated K 0d values were calculated for Forsmark metagranite using the mechanical damage transfer
factor only (fcec is neglected). If it is furthermore assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to
variable groundwater composition are internalised in the data, this data can be deemed suitable for
SR-Site application conditions. The recommended Kd range for use in SR-Site transport calculations
is given in Figure O-2. The synthetic data shown previously in Figure O-1 was also corrected for
mechanical damage effects and is shown for comparative purposes in Figure O-2. In this case, the
original error estimate was doubled (i.e. assuming a 2σ error) and reinterpreted as a lognormal
uncertainty distribution.




216                                                                                               R-10-48
                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7
                          log10 Kd = -0.80±0.28




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5
                                                             log10 Kd = -0.54±0.32
               0.4


               0.3


               0.2                                         Corrected synthetic data, 2-sigma (0 mg/l DOC)
                                                           Corrected & resampled empirical data (1 mg/l DOC)
               0.1
                                                           Lognormal fit to data

                0
               1.00E-02                  1.00E-01                  1.00E+00                       1.00E+01
                                                    Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure O-2. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Sn(IV) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure. For comparative purposes, a corrected distribution is also shown for
 the synthetic data estimate (assuming a 2σ error estimate and reinterpreted as a lognormal distribution).




 R-10-48                                                                                                       217
                                                                                         Appendix P

Kd data derivation sheet for strontium (Sr)
Overview and evaluation of site investigation data
Site specific sorption data were obtained for Sr(II) during the site investigations at Forsmark /Byegård
et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/. These data are summarised in the bedrock transport
properties site descriptive model /Crawford 2008/ and are the basis for Kd values recommended for
use in SR-Site. In most cases there is a time dependency in the experimental data with a clear trend
towards higher Rd values at later times. The data also exhibit a relatively clear surface area depend-
ency whereby smaller crushed particle sizes are associated with higher sorptivities than larger size
fractions. A typical time series for Sr(II) sorption on Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057)
is shown in Figure P-1.
For the same reasons as outlined previously, no attempt has been made to model the time dependency
of the data. The data have therefore been treated by considering the data set in its entirety without
filtering of values on the basis of crushed size fraction or contact time. Sr(II) is particularly problem-
atic since its sorption is very weak and in some cases not possible to quantify. It is not uncommon
for the apparent partitioning coefficient, Rd to be negative owing to random errors in the measure-
ment of concentration where the amount sorbed is less than the standard error of the measurement
itself. In such cases it is not generally possible to quantify whether sorption has, in fact, occurred.


              0.1
                         Sr(II), Fresh (mean of triplicate samples)


                               1-2 mm size fraction
                               0.25 -0.5 mm size fraction
                               0.063 -0.125 mm size fraction




Rd (m3/kg)   0.01




             0.001
                     1                                10                      100     1000
                                                            contact time (days)

Figure P-1. Typical time series for Sr(II) sorption Rd (m3/kg) measured in the Forsmark site investigation
studies. There is a clear sorption dependency on both particle size and time.




R-10-48                                                                                                 219
                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4
                                                                                Brine
               0.3
                                                                                Saline_Fm

                                                                                Fresh
               0.2
                                                                                Marine
               0.1                                                              Rd = 0


                0
                -0.002   0     0.002       0.004        0.006     0.008        0.01         0.012
                                              Rd (m /kg)
                                                    3



 Figure P-2. Comparison of Rd (m3/kg) values estimated for Sr(II) sorption based upon Forsmark site investi-
 gation data. The plotted series correspond to the 1–2 mm size fraction and longest contact time (~180 days).
 Only the Fresh groundwater data set contains a sufficient proportion of non-negative values that the estimated
 Rd value can be considered to be statistically quantifiable. Sorption is sufficiently weak for saline, brine and
 marine groundwaters as to be effectively unquantifiable (i.e. approximately equal numbers of positive and
 negative Rd values reflecting random errors in the activities measured for blank samples).


 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 The procedure for derivation of Sr(II) Kd values relevant for application in SR-Site is the same as
 that outlined previously for Cs(I) and the other ion-exchanging solutes and is not discussed further
 here. Estimated K 0d data corrected for surface area, mechanical damage, and CEC effects using
 Equation 5-2 are plotted in Figure P-3 assuming Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) as
 a representative rock type for the Forsmark site. Although the uncertainty ranges for the individual
 data sets are large, there is a clear tendency towards greater sorptivity under low ionic strength con-
 ditions relative to that obtained for the more saline groundwater types. Some of the Rd values for the
 data sets corresponding to saline, marine, and brine groundwater types are sufficiently low that the
 extrapolated Kd values are significantly lower than the minimum effective Kd value corresponding to
 storage of freely dissolved solute in the rock matrix porosity.
 Similarly to the other ion-exchanging solutes studied in the site investigations, chemistry transfer
 factors were estimated for the groundwater compositions expected under SR-Site conditions. In
 order to do this, the theoretical Kd was calculated using PHREEQC and the SKB-TDB /Duro et al.
 2006/ for 10,000 randomly selected groundwater compositions taken from the SR-Site temperate
 domain simulations /Salas et al. 2010/. The exchange model described in Section 5.1.1 was used
 assuming selectivity coefficients for Äspö diorite as a basis for calculations. Comparison of Kd values
 calculated in this manner with the corresponding theoretical result for the Forsmark saline reference
 water allows the groundwater chemistry transfer factor, fchem to be calculated in straight-forward
 fashion for the projected application conditions using Equation 5-9. Since the data are normalised in
 the calculation, the final value of fchem is relatively insensitive to the CEC of the simulated rock-water
 system provided the differences are not so great that very different groundwater compositions result.
 In the SR-Site groundwater simulations, only the major ions are specified. For the purpose of simulating
 ion-exchange processes involving trace components not included in these simulations, the concentrations
 of these constituents need to be estimated in some way. Background concentrations of the components



 220                                                                                                     R-10-48
                1
                           Brine (Fm SDM)
                           Brine (Lx SDM)
               0.9
                           Fresh (Fm SDM)
                           Fresh (Lx SDM)
               0.8         Marine (Fm SDM)
                           Marine (Lx SDM)
               0.7         Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)
                           Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)
                           Type V (Lx SDM)




CDF (% rank)
               0.6
                           minimum effective Kd

               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                 0
               1.00E-09   1.00E-08     1.00E-07   1.00E-06       1.00E-05   1.00E-04   1.00E-03   1.00E-02

                                                     Kd (m /kg)
                                                        0    3



 Figure P-3. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Sr(II) sorption based on raw Rd data for site-specific rock
 types and groundwater compositions as reported in the Forsmark (Fm SDM) and Laxemar (Lx SDM) site
 investigations. Surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fA, fm, and
 fcec) have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed
 appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented
 as an empirical cumulative distribution function. A minimum effective Kd reference line is plotted in the
 figure indicating the upper 95% confidence limit for the matrix storage capacity of the rock based on water
 saturation porosity


 (Cs, Sr, Rb, and Ba) in the groundwater were estimated using correlations derived from the site
 investigation hydrochemistry data. Full details concerning how these correlations were established
 and implemented can be found in Appendix A.
 Simulation results for the central case selectivity coefficients are given in Figure P-4 and indicate a
 slightly decreased Kd at early times relative to the reference groundwater. At longer times, however,
 the progressive freshening of the groundwater due to intrusion of a meteoric component gives elevated
 Kd values relative to the reference groundwater. In this case, the reference groundwater was taken to
 be fresh water on account of the very uncertain Rd estimates obtained for the more saline groundwater
 compositions. As can be seen from Figure P-4, the groundwater compositions during the SR-Site tem-
 perate period are somewhat more saline than the reference groundwater thereby implying a reduction
 of up to 2 orders of magnitude for the central best estimate Kd value.
 Additional simulations were carried out to quantify the impact of uncertainty in the selectivity coefficients
 using the 2σ error estimates specified in Table 5-5 and assuming lognormally distributed uncertainties.
 The results of this analysis are shown in Figure P-5 and indicate a relatively small impact of aleatory
 uncertainty.
 Using the calculated fchem distribution, it is possible to estimate Kd values appropriate for application
 groundwater compositions by convolution of the individual probability density functions or by using an
 equivalent stochastic method. The latter method being simpler to implement numerically was chosen
 and used to estimate the Kd values presented in this compilation. The stochastic method was based
 upon random sampling (105 samples) of the individual probability density functions and multiplica-
 tion of the individually sampled values using Equation 5-3. The resulting distributions of Kd values
 are plotted in Figure P-6 to Figure P-9 for different times during the temperate calculation cases and
 include the additional impact of stochastically perturbed selectivity coefficients as described above.



 R-10-48                                                                                                     221
                1



              0.5



                0



              -0.5




log10 fchem
                                                  9000 y
                -1



              -1.5                                                            3000 y


                                   5000 y
                -2



              -2.5
                                                                              2000 y


                -3
                 -2.5   -2             -1.5                -1          -0.5             0
                                     log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

 Figure P-4. Chemistry transfer factors, fchem calculated for Sr(II) sorption at application groundwater
 conditions in the SR-Site temperate case. The plotted data represent 10,000 randomly selected groundwater
 compositions calculated individually using PHREEQC and the assumed ion exchange model (central case
 selectivity coefficients). Data are given for 2,000 y (lime green markers), 3,000 y (dark green), 5,000 y (blue),
 9,000 y (red). The cross-hairs in the figure represent the relative location of the reference groundwater (fresh).


                 1



               0.5



                 0



              -0.5




log10 fchem
                                                  9000 y
                -1



              -1.5                                                            3000 y


                                   5000 y
                -2



              -2.5
                                                                              2000 y


                -3
                -2.5    -2             -1.5                -1          -0.5             0
                                    log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

 Figure P-5. Chemistry transfer factors, fchem calculated for Sr(II) sorption at application groundwater
 conditions in the SR-Site temperate case. The plotted data represent 10,000 randomly selected groundwater
 compositions calculated individually using PHREEQC and the assumed ion exchange model (central case
 selectivity coefficients). The plotted data include the additional effect of random perturbation of selectivity
 coefficients conforming to their error estimates. Data are given for 2,000 y (lime green markers), 3,000 y
 (dark green), 5,000 y (blue), 9,000 y (red). The cross-hairs in the figure represent the relative location of
 the reference groundwater (fresh).


 222                                                                                                       R-10-48
                   -1



                   -2
                           Fresh
                                                                                               Saline (Lx)
                   -3
                                                                Type V


                   -4




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                   -5
                                               Marine


                   -6

                                        Saline (Fm)
                   -7
                                                                                                     Brine

                   -8



                   -9



                  -10
                    -2.5           -2                   -1.5              -1            -0.5     0           0.5
                                                               log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure P-6. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Sr(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 2,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


                    0


                   -1


                   -2
                           Fresh                                                               Saline (Lx)

                   -3
                                                               Type V


                   -4



log10Kd (m3/kg)
                   -5


                   -6
                                                  Marine


                   -7
                                        Saline (Fm)
                                                                                                     Brine

                   -8


                   -9


                  -10
                    -2.5           -2                   -1.5              -1            -0.5     0           0.5
                                                           log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure P-7. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Sr(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 3,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.




R-10-48                                                                                                            223
                    0


                   -1
                                                                                  Type V

                   -2
                           Fresh                                                     Saline (Lx)


                   -3


                   -4



log10Kd (m3/kg)
                   -5


                   -6
                               Marine

                   -7
                               Saline (Fm)
                                                                                               Brine

                   -8


                   -9


                  -10
                    -2.5             -2      -1.5           -1           -0.5              0           0.5
                                                log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure P-8. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Sr(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 5,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.


                     0


                                                                                 Type V
                    -1


                                                                                     Saline (Lx)
                    -2
                           Fresh

                    -3


                    -4




log10Kd (m3/kg)
                    -5


                    -6      Marine



                    -7
                            Saline (Fm)                                                        Brine

                    -8


                    -9


                  -10
                    -2.5             -2      -1.5            -1           -0.5             0           0.5
                                             log10Ionic Strength (mol/kgw)

Figure P-9. Cross-plot of Kd (m3/kg) values for Sr(II) versus ionic strength (mol/kgw) on logarithmic axes.
The recommended data are for SR-Site application conditions at 9,000 y in the temperate case and are
plotted as the swarm of grey markers. Kd0 data are plotted as geometric means with 1σ standard errors for
the different groundwater compositions used in the site investigation.



224                                                                                                          R-10-48
Although only the K 0d data set for the fresh reference groundwater was used to extrapolate to applica-
tion conditions, the plotted results of the calculations indicate a fair qualitative agreement with the
K 0d values for groundwaters that were not used in the calculations. It is acknowledged, however,
that there is significant spread in the data that makes it difficult to properly ascertain the accuracy
of the predictions. The assumption of the simplified, single-site ion-exchange model and selectivity
coefficients derived for the Äspö diorite rock, however, appears to give an acceptably low level of
epistemic uncertainty with regard to Sr(II) sorption for the purposes of SR-Site safety assessment
calculations involving Forsmark site specific conditions.


Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
Based on the ion-exchange simulations described in the previous section, the following Kd ranges
are recommended for use at different times in the hydrogeochemical evolution of the repository
environment:
log10 Kd ≈ –5.44±0.99     (t = 2,000 y)						                                            (P-1)
log10 Kd ≈ –5.47±1.0      (t = 3,000 y)						                                            (P-2)
log10 Kd ≈ –5.38±0.99     (t = 5,000 y)						                                            (P-3)
log10 Kd ≈ –5.11±1.05     (t = 9,000 y)						                                            (P-4)
As can be seen from the recommended data, the changing salinity of the repository environment has
only a weak impact on the Kd distribution, with a tendency to towards slightly higher sorptivities
with time. Since it is not possible to consider temporally variable Kd values in safety assessment
calculations, the time period giving the lowest Kd value is recommended to be used for calculations.
This corresponds to the groundwater conditions existing at 3,000 y. The numerically calculated
Kd uncertainty distributions were found to be conform relatively well to a lognormal distribution.
Unlike Cs(I) and Ra(II), the predicted uncertainty distribution for Kd at 9,000 y was not found to
be significantly skewed due to the broadly skewed distribution of ionic strengths prevailing in the
groundwater at this time (cf. Figure P-5). This is thought to be due to the uncertainty of the underly-
ing reference data set (i.e. K 0d for fresh water) which seems to dominate the statistical dispersion of
the extrapolated data.




R-10-48                                                                                              225
                                                                                             Appendix Q

 Kd data derivation sheet for technetium (Tc)
 Overview and evaluation of available literature data
 The most detailed set of Tc sorption data for relevant rock types and groundwater compositions in
 the open literature is documented by /Huitti et al. 1996/. In this study, sorption was measured on
 crushed rock samples from three borehole sections representing three different alteration types of
 Rapakivi granite (Hästholmen, Finland). The sorption experiments were carried out under anoxic
 conditions using a natural groundwater sample (LPVA2) with an ionic strength of about 0.17 M and
 a liquid to solid ratio of 10 ml/g. The groundwater was dominated by NaCl with a composition close
 to that of the Marine groundwater type used in the Forsmark and Laxemar laboratory investigations.
 The spike concentration of Tc was 10–8 M. The range of redox potentials measured during the experi-
 ments together with the known pH and carbonate concentration of the contact solutions suggest
 speciation in the tetravalent, Tc(IV) form. This is consistent with the magnitude of sorption measured
 during the experiments, since the oxidised heptavalent, Tc(VII) form is only very weakly sorbed (for
 all practical purposes, it may be considered non-sorbing).
 Sorption experiments were carried out on three samples of granite described as fresh, weathered, and
 altered. As noted previously for other solutes, it was generally found that the sorption of Tc did not scale
 linearly with BET surface area and Rd values estimated for the weathered and altered samples were
 somewhat less than what would be otherwise predicted on the basis of their increased surface area.
 The rock samples were the same as described previously for Np sorption (Appendix G, Table G-1).
 The data for Tc are estimated in terms of the percentage sorbed, S(%) calculated with the aid of a
 radiometric mass balance. The actual Rd data in the references are given without error estimates and
 in some cases reported as “≥” a specified value owing to detection limit issues. In order to obtain
 numerical ranges of Kd including uncertainty estimates, the procedures outlined in Appendix C were
 used. Since there are only a small number of Rd values for each rock type, re-sampling of the Rd
 values and their associated errors allows a more realistic range of data uncertainty to be estimated.
 The composite distribution of Rd values obtained for each rock type is shown in Figure Q-1.


                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2                                                    Saline (LPVA2/YT5-1)
                                                                      Saline (LPVA2/YT5-2)
               0.1                                                    Saline (LPVA2/YT5-3)


                 0
               1.00E-02   1.00E-01           1.00E+00             1.00E+01             1.00E+02
                                            Rd (m /kg)
                                              0   3



 Figure Q-1. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Tc(IV) sorption under anoxic conditions, based on literature Rd
 data and presented as an empirical cumulative distribution function for rocks taken from Finnish investigation
 sites. The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-estimated from tabulated sorption
 percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distributions plotted in the figure.


 R-10-48                                                                                                   227
 Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
 As can be seen from Figure Q-1, the re-sampled data indicate that there are only minor differences
 between the sorptivities measured for the different alteration types of Rapakivi granite. In general,
 the sorptivity was very strong (in most cases S ≈ 99±1%) and thereby close to the limit of quantifica-
 tion. This gives rise to relatively large tailing in the uncertainty distribution given the small number
 of measurements (6 measurements). This weakly bounded upper limit on the magnitude of sorption
 in this case could be a potential source of bias.
 As noted previously for the rock samples used in this particular study, the relatively large differences
 between the BET surface areas and CEC measured for these different materials do not translate into
 correspondingly large shifts in sorptivity. For the same reasons as outlined previously (Appendix G),
 only the data for the unaltered rock type YT-1 have been propagated further in the analysis.
 As noted previously for the rock samples used in this particular study (Appendix G), the differences
 in BET surface area and CEC reported for the fresh, weathered, and altered samples of Rapakivi
 granite do not appear to translate into correspondingly large shifts in sorptivity. The sorptivity of
 these three rock types as reported by /Huitti et al. 1996/ appears to be very similar. As previously, the
 data sets for the weathered and altered rock have been disregarded since the BET surface areas and
 CEC values would otherwise imply unrealistic transfer factors giving excessively low Kd estimates
 for application conditions. Only the data for the unaltered rock type YT-1 have therefore been propa-
 gated further in the analysis.
 Since the same materials were used for Np sorption measurements, the same fm and fcec transfer factors
 were used as described previously in Appendix G. Using the fm and fcec transfers factors, estimated
 K 0d values were calculated for the original 6 data points. On account of the limited number of data
 points, the individual K 0d values and their uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex
 combination of the underlying lognormal distributions, now including the additional uncertainties of
 the fm and fcec transfer factors. The resulting translated and expanded uncertainty distribution for K 0d
 is shown in Figure Q-2.


                1

                          Saline (LPVA2/YT5-1)
               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-04       1.00E-03           1.00E-02        1.00E-01   1.00E+00   1.00E+01
                                                        Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure Q-2. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for Tc(IV) sorption based on literature Rd data. Surface area
 normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fcec) have been considered in
 the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark
 metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented as an empirical cumulative
 distribution function.



 228                                                                                                R-10-48
 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 Since there is only one relevant data set for Tc(IV) sorption, a lognormal fit was made to the re-sampled
 uncertainty distribution shown in Figure Q-2 assuming that the principal uncertainties relating to
 variable groundwater composition are internalised in the data set (see Figure R-5). Owing to the very
 strong sorption measured in these experiments and the potential for bias in estimating the uncertainty
 distribution, the recommendation for SR-Site is to use the uncertainty distribution proposed for Pu(IV)
 instead since this is based upon a substantially larger data set. Interestingly, the proposed distribution
 for Pu(IV) is almost identical to that estimated for Tc(IV). This agreement does not necessarily mean
 that the data are accurate since the Pu data are also characterised by strong sorption (S ≥ 99±0.1%)
 and could be affected by the same inherent quantification biases. In the case of Pu, however, the
 reported error of the sorption percentage, S% was a factor 10 lower than that reported for Tc. This
 means that the variance of the aggregate data set has a larger influence on the estimated uncertainty
 for Pu sorption than the error of the individual measurements as in the case of Tc.

 Assessment of predominant redox state under application
 groundwater conditions
 In order to ascertain the principal redox state of Tc under application groundwater conditions, the
 speciation of Tc was calculated for 20,000 randomly sampled groundwater compositions taken from
 the SR-Site temperate domain simulations /Salas et al. 2010/. The calculations were made for the pre-
 vailing groundwater chemistry at time 2,000 y, 3,000 y, 5,000 y, and 9,000 y using PHREEQC and the
 SKB-TDB /Duro et al. 2006/. Since it is not certain which redox couple can be assumed to dominate
 the groundwater redox conditions in the SR-Site temperate case groundwater simulations, two different
 redox couples have been assumed as individual case studies for groundwater redox control.
 In addition to calculating the actual speciation of Tc in the application groundwater, sweep calcula-
 tions were made for a range of hypothetical redox potentials to ascertain the location of the redox
 transition point where the Tc(IV) and Tc(VII) species are present in roughly equal concentrations.
 For numerical reasons this was done only for the convex hull of data points describing the envelope
 of pH and total carbonate concentrations in the application groundwater. From these data, a plane of


                1
                          Empirical data set (YT5-1/LPVA2)
               0.9        lognormal fit


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5
                                                                   log10 Kd = -1.30±0.70
               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-04     1.00E-03           1.00E-02        1.00E-01             1.00E+00   1.00E+01
                                                      Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure Q-3. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Tc(IV) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.




 R-10-48                                                                                                  229
Figure Q-4. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater
compositions at 2,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO4–2/FeSam redox couple. The calculations
indicate that sampled groundwater compositions are sufficiently reducing for Tc(IV) to be the dominant redox
species (min and max Eh range indicated by green and blue coloured outline rectangles). The theoretical
transition region where Tc(IV) and Tc(VII) are present in equal concentration is indicated by the red plane.


best fit can then be calculated for the transition point which can be shown to be valid for all ground-
water compositions within the convex hull. This provides a visual means of ascertaining how close
the system is to the point of Tc(IV)/Tc(VII) redox transition. The redox parameter space calculated
in this fashion is plotted in Figure Q-4 for the groundwater compositions existing at 2,000 y in the
temperate domain simulations.
Although the location of the plane of best fit roughly demarcates the regions of predominance of
the oxidising and reducing forms of Tc, it does not show the full extent of the region where non-
negligible fractions of both redox species can co-exist. The redox sweep data are therefore plotted in
Figure Q-5 where the fraction of the reduced Tc(IV) form is given as a function of redox potential.
There is a general tendency for the redox potential to decrease over time in the SR-Site temperate case
simulations due to the freshening of the groundwater with a meteoric component of higher carbonate
content. The redox parameter space is plotted in Figure Q-6 for the groundwater compositions existing
at 9,000 y. These represent the highest redox potentials encountered in the temperate time period
simulated for SR-Site. As can be seen from Figure Q-4 to Figure Q-7, the redox potential projected for
SR-Site groundwater conditions is sufficiently low that fully reducing conditions are generally assured.
It is therefore recommended that redox speciation in the form of Tc(IV) is assumed for transport model-
ling purposes in SR-Site.




230                                                                                                  R-10-48
           Fully Reducing conditions, Tc (IV)      Transition region, Tc(IV,VII)       Fully oxidising conditions, Tc(VII)
                                                   (depends on pH and HCO3-)
                   1


                  0.9


                  0.8


                  0.7




fraction Tc(IV)
                  0.6


                  0.5


                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                    0
                   -400         -300            -200            -100               0                100                200

                                                            Eh (mV)

 Figure Q-5. Theoretical redox transition zone for Tc (blue shaded region) compared with redox conditions
 in SR-Site temperate case at 2,000 y (dark green and dark red shaded region with boundaries marked vertical
 broken lines) which encompasses the potential span of both the Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The light
 green and red shaded areas represent fully reducing (100% Tc(IV)) and fully oxidising (100% Tc(VII))
 conditions, respectively. The cross-hairs in the figure approximately indicate the centroid of the transition
 point for the application groundwater pH and carbonate ranges illustrated previously in Figure Q-4.




  Figure Q-6. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater
  compositions at 9,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO4–2/FeSam redox couple. The calculations
  indicate that sampled groundwater compositions are sufficiently reducing for Tc(IV) to be the dominant redox
  species (min and max Eh range indicated by green and blue coloured outline rectangles). The theoretical
  transition region where Tc(IV) and Tc(VII) are present in equal concentration is indicated by the red plane.




  R-10-48                                                                                                                    231
                  Fully Reducing conditions, Tc(IV)          Transition region, Tc(IV,VII)       Fully oxidising conditions, Tc(VII)
                                                             (depends on pH and HCO3-)
                   1


                  0.9


                  0.8


                  0.7




fraction Tc(IV)
                  0.6


                  0.5


                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                    0
                   -400             -300              -200            -100                   0             100               200
                                                                   Eh (mV)

  Figure Q-7. Theoretical redox transition zone for Tc (blue shaded region) compared with redox conditions
  in SR-Site temperate case at 9,000 y (dark green shaded region) which encompasses the potential span
  of both Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The light green and red shaded areas represent fully reducing
  (100% Tc(IV)) and fully oxidising (100% Tc(VII)) conditions, respectively. The cross-hairs in the figure
  approximately indicate the centroid of the transition point for the application groundwater pH and carbon-
  ate ranges illustrated previously in Figure Q-6.




  232                                                                                                                                  R-10-48
                                                                                        Appendix R

Kd data derivation sheet for uranium (U)
Overview and evaluation of site investigation data
Site specific sorption data were obtained for U during the site investigations at Forsmark /Byegård
et al. 2008/ and Laxemar /Selnert et al. 2009/. These data are summarised in the bedrock transport
properties site descriptive model reports /Crawford 2008, Crawford and Sidborn 2009/ and are the
basis for Kd values recommended for use in SR-Site under oxidising to mildly reducing conditions.
Although sorption experiments were carried out in an inert glove box atmosphere, the intensity of
the sorption and the fact that no particular effort was made to artificially maintain reducing condi-
tions suggests that U was most likely present in the hexavalent redox state, U(VI). Given that there
were only a relatively small number of measurements available from the site investigations and because
of the sensitivity of U(VI) sorption to possibly drifting pH and redox conditions, no attempt was made
to interpret the data with regard to time dependent behaviour. The Forsmark site data are based on
rock samples taken from two borehole sections while the Laxemar site data are based on rock samples
taken from a single borehole section.


Overview and evaluation of available literature data
The most detailed set of U sorption data for relevant rock types and groundwater compositions in
the open literature is documented by /Huitti et al. 1996/. In this study, sorption was measured on
crushed rock samples from three borehole sections representing three different alteration types of
Rapakivi granite (Hästholmen, Finland). The sorption experiments were carried out under both
oxic and anoxic conditions using a natural groundwater sample (LPVA2) with an ionic strength of
about 0.17 M and liquid to solid ratio of 10 ml/g. The groundwater was dominated by NaCl with a
composition close to that of the Marine groundwater type used in the Forsmark and Laxemar labora-
tory investigations. Owing to the large iron content of the groundwater (~6 mg/l), the groundwater
samples used in the oxic experiments were equilibrated with the ambient atmosphere for a period of
a week and filtered (0.22 µm Millipore filter) prior to use. No experiments were made for U sorption
under reducing conditions. On account of the oxic experimental conditions and the generally weak
sorption measured, the most likely redox form is assumed to be U(VI). Spike concentrations of U
were in the range 10–5–10–8 M.
Sorption experiments were carried out on three samples of granite described as fresh, weathered, and
altered. As noted previously for other solutes, it was generally found that the sorption of U did not scale
linearly with BET surface area and Rd values estimated for the weathered and altered samples were
somewhat less than what would be otherwise predicted on the basis of their increased surface area.
The rock samples were the same as described previously for Np sorption (Appendix G, Table G-1).
The data for U are estimated in terms of the percentage sorbed, S(%) which is calculated with the aid
of a radiometric mass balance. The actual Rd data in the references are given without error estimates
and in some cases reported as “≥” a specified value owing to detection limit issues. In order to obtain
numerical ranges of Kd including uncertainty estimates, the procedures outlined in Appendix C were
used. Since there are only a small number of Rd values for each rock type, re-sampling of the Rd
values and their associated errors allows a more realistic range of data uncertainty to be estimated.
The composite distribution of Rd values obtained for each rock type is shown in Figure R-1.


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
U is unusual in that a mixture of site data and literature data have been considered in the recom-
mendation of Kd ranges for use in SR-Site. The selection process and associated calculations are
described separately, however, since data handling procedures were different for the site investigation
and literature data.




R-10-48                                                                                                233
                1

                              Saline (LPVA2/YT5-1)
               0.9
                              Saline (LPVA2/YT5-2)

               0.8            Saline (LPVA2/YT5-3)
                              minimum effective Kd
               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                 0
               1.00E-06   1.00E-05              1.00E-04         1.00E-03            1.00E-02
                                              Rd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure R-1. Rd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for U(VI) sorption under oxic conditions, based on literature Rd
 data and presented as an empirical cumulative distribution function for rocks taken from Finnish investiga-
 tion sites. The individual data points and their uncertainties have been re-estimated from tabulated sorption
 percentage data and then re-sampled to give the composite distributions plotted in the figure.


 Site specific data from Forsmark and Laxemar
 The procedure for derivation of U(VI) Kd values for application in SR-Site is similar to that used
 for Np (Appendix G). Since U(VI) has been shown to sorb preferentially in association with biotite,
 the CEC transfer factor is considered relevant for this nuclide even though U(VI) sorption is thought
 to occur primarily by way of a surface complexation mechanism. Although it cannot be guaranteed
 that the sorption of U(VI) on biotite is not simultaneously accompanied by heterogeneous reduction
 of the sorbed species to the strongly sorbed U(IV) form, the data are still considered to be broadly
 representative of U(VI) sorption for the purposes of data selection. Estimated K 0d data corrected for
 surface area, mechanical damage, and CEC effects are plotted in Figure R-2. Here, it is implicitly
 assumed that the measured Rd data correspond to U(VI) sorption.


 Literature data for Rapakivi granite
 As can be seen from Figure R-1, the re-sampled data indicate that there are only minor differences
 between the sorptivities measured for the different alteration types of Rapakivi granite. The relatively
 small spread of the data is related to the small number of measurements and the narrow uncertainty
 spans of the estimated values. As noted previously for the rock samples used in this particular study,
 the relatively large differences between the BET surface areas and CEC measured for these different
 materials do not translate into correspondingly large shifts in sorptivity. For the same reasons as out-
 lined previously (Appendix G), only the data for the unaltered rock type YT-1 have been propagated
 further in the analysis.
 Since the same materials were used for Np sorption measurements, the same fm and fcec transfer factors
 were used as described previously in Appendix G. Using the fm and fcec transfers factors, estimated K 0d
 values were calculated for the original 12 data points. On account of the limited number of data points,
 the individual K 0d values and their uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex combination
 of the underlying lognormal distributions, now including the additional uncertainties of the fm and
 fcec transfer factors. The resulting expanded uncertainty distribution for K 0d is shown in Figure R-3.
 Although not plotted in the Figure it can also be noted that the BET surface areas and CEC of the
 altered materials imply sufficiently large correction factors that a large portion of the extrapolated Kd
 uncertainty distributions would be less than the minimum effective Kd value for aqueous storage in
 the matrix porosity (indicated by the vertical broken line in Figure R-3).

 234                                                                                                  R-10-48
                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6                                                            Brine (Fm SDM)

                                                                              Fresh (Fm SDM)
               0.5
                                                                              Fresh (Lx SDM)
               0.4
                                                                              Marine (Fm SDM)

               0.3                                                            Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)

                                                                              Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)
               0.2
                                                                              Type V (Lx SDM)
               0.1
                                                                              minimum effective Kd

                 0
               1.00E-07   1.00E-06      1.00E-05     1.00E-04    1.00E-03      1.00E-02         1.00E-01

                                                   Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure R-2. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for U(VI) sorption based on raw Rd data for site-specific rock
 types and groundwater compositions as reported in the Forsmark (Fm SDM) and Laxemar (Lx SDM) site
 investigations. Surface area normalisation, mechanical damage, and CEC transfer factors (fA, fm, and fCEC)
 have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data are corrected to give values deemed
 appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions and are presented
 as an empirical cumulative distribution function. A minimum effective Kd reference line is plotted in the
 figure indicating the upper 95% confidence limit for the matrix storage capacity of the rock based on water
 saturation porosity.


                 1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2

                                                                             Saline (LPVA2/YT5-1)
               0.1
                                                                             minimum effective Kd

                0
               1.00E-07          1.00E-06            1.00E-05           1.00E-04                1.00E-03
                                                   Kd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure R-3. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for U(VI) sorption based on literature Rd data. Mechanical damage
 and CEC transfer factors (fm, and fCEC) have been considered in the estimation procedure. The raw data
 are corrected to give values deemed appropriate for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under
 in situ conditions and are presented as an empirical cumulative distribution function.



 R-10-48                                                                                                   235
 Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
 The site investigation data and literature derived values (taken from Figure R-2 and Figure R-3) are
 shown side by side in Figure R-4. Although the K 0d values derived from site specific and literature
 data show reasonable agreement, they have been processed in different ways and it is possible that
 this could introduce unnecessary bias if the different data sets are combined numerically. Unlike Np(V),
 however, the estimated uncertainty distribution for Kd based on the literature data is at the lower end
 of the range for the composite data set. For this reason, the data sets have been combined in this
 particular case even though this could conceivably introduce bias. This is justified in the current
 compilation by appealing to arguments of caution.
 If it is assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to variable groundwater composition are
 internalised in the individual data sets shown previously in Figure R-4, a recommended range for
 application in SR-Site can be defined by aggregating these into a global data set. The relevant Kd
 range for application in SR-Site is given in Figure R-5.


 Assessment of predominant redox state under application
 groundwater conditions
 In order to ascertain the principal redox state of U under application groundwater conditions, the
 speciation of U was calculated for 20,000 randomly sampled groundwater compositions taken from
 the SR-Site temperate domain simulations /Salas et al. 2010/. The calculations were made for the
 prevailing groundwater chemistry at time 2,000 y, 3,000 y, 5,000 y, and 9,000 y using PHREEQC
 and the SKB-TDB /Duro et al. 2006/.


                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6                                                       Brine (Fm SDM)

                                                                         Fresh (Fm SDM)
               0.5
                                                                         Fresh (Lx SDM)

               0.4                                                       Marine (Fm SDM)

                                                                         Saline_Fm (Fm SDM)
               0.3
                                                                         Saline_Lx (Lx SDM)

               0.2                                                       Type V (Lx SDM)

                                                                         Saline (LPVA2/YT5-1)
               0.1
                                                                         minimum effective Kd
                 0
               1.00E-07   1.00E-06   1.00E-05    1.00E-04    1.00E-03   1.00E-02          1.00E-01
                                                Kd (m /kg)
                                                  0   3



 Figure R-4. Kd0 (m3/kg) values calculated for U(VI) sorption corrected to give values deemed appropriate
 for Forsmark metagranite (SKB rock code 101057) under in situ conditions. This figure combines the data
 from the site investigations (Figure R-2) and literature data (Figure R-3) and indicates a relatively good
 agreement between the data sets of different origin.




 236                                                                                                 R-10-48
                1
                          Aggregate data set (all groundwater compositions)
                          lognormal fit
               0.9
                          minimum effective Kd

               0.8


               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6


               0.5
                                                                              log10 Kd = -3.97±0.66
               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
               1.00E-07     1.00E-06            1.00E-05           1.00E-04            1.00E-03       1.00E-02
                                                       Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure R-5. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Np(V) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.


 In addition to calculating the actual speciation of U in the application groundwater, sweep calcula-
 tions were made for a range of hypothetical redox potentials to ascertain the location of the redox
 transition point where the U(IV) and U(VI) species are present in roughly equal concentrations. For
 numerical reasons this was done only for the convex hull of data points describing the envelope of
 pH and total carbonate concentrations in the application groundwater. From these data, a plane of
 best fit can then be calculated for the transition point which can be shown to be valid for all ground-
 water compositions within the convex hull. This provides a visual means of ascertaining how close
 the system is to the point of U(IV)/U(VI) redox transition. The redox parameter space calculated
 in this fashion is plotted in Figure R-6 for the groundwater compositions existing at 2,000 y in the
 temperate case groundwater simulations.
 Although the location of the plane of best fit roughly demarcates the regions of predominance of
 the oxidising and reducing forms of U, it does not show the full extent of the region where non-
 negligible fractions of both redox species can co-exist. The redox sweep data are therefore plotted in
 Figure R-7 where the fraction of the reduced U(IV) form is given as a function of redox potential.
 There is a general tendency for the redox potential to decrease over time in the SR-Site temperate
 domain simulations due to the freshening of the groundwater with a meteoric component of higher
 carbonate content. The redox parameter space is plotted in Figure R-8 for the groundwater composi-
 tions existing at 9,000 y. These represent the highest redox potentials encountered in the temperate
 time period simulated for SR-Site.
 As can be seen from Figure R-6 to Figure R-9, the redox potential projected for SR-Site groundwater
 conditions is generally not sufficiently low to always guarantee fully reducing conditions. This assumes,
 of course, that the concentration (dissolved and immobile) of U is sufficiently low that it does not have a
 strong impact on the redox chemistry of the groundwater. Within the near-field repository environment
 there could be a substantial amount of mineralised uranium (i.e. in the form of UO2 or other solubility
 limiting phase). In these locations the mobility of uranium might therefore be self-limiting owing to
 the redox buffering effect of the uranium mineralisation itself.




 R-10-48                                                                                                         237
Figure R-6. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater com-
positions at 2,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO4–2/FeSam redox couple. The calculations
indicate that sampled groundwater compositions cannot be guaranteed to be sufficiently reducing for U(IV)
to be the dominant redox species (min and max Eh range indicated by coloured rectangles). The theoretical
transition region where U(IV) and U(VI) are present in equal concentration is indicated by the red plane.


                                     Transition region, U(IV,VI)
Fully Reducing conditions, U(IV)                                   Fully oxidising conditions, U(VI)
                                     (depends on pH and HCO3-)

                  1


                 0.9


                 0.8


                 0.7


                 0.6




fraction U(IV)
                 0.5


                 0.4


                 0.3


                 0.2


                 0.1


                  0
                       -400   -300     -200           -100         0              100              200
                                               Eh (mV)

Figure R-7. Theoretical redox transition zone for U (blue shaded region) compared with redox conditions
in SR-Site temperate case at 2,000 y (dark green and dark red shaded region with boundaries marked vertical
broken lines) which encompasses the potential span of both the Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The light
green and red shaded areas represent fully reducing (100% U(IV)) and fully oxidising (100% U(VI)) condi-
tions, respectively. The cross-hairs in the figure approximately indicate the centroid of the transition point
for the application groundwater pH and carbonate ranges illustrated previously in Figure R-6. The yellow
shaded region on the left-hand side indicates the stability limit for water.


238                                                                                                      R-10-48
 Figure R-8. Redox parameter space for 20,000 randomly selected SR-Site temperate case groundwater
 compositions at 9,000 y for (a) Fe2+/Fe(OH)3 redox couple, and (b) SO4–2/FeSam redox couple. The calcula-
 tions indicate that sampled groundwater compositions cannot be guaranteed sufficiently reducing for U(IV)
 to be the dominant redox species (min and max Eh range indicated by coloured rectangles). The theoretical
 transition region where U(IV) and U(VI) are present in equal concentration is indicated by the red plane.


                                       Transition region, U(IV,VI)
    Fully Reducing conditions, U(IV)                                 Fully oxidising conditions, U(VI)
                                       (depends on pH and HCO3-)
                  1


                 0.9


                 0.8


                 0.7


                 0.6




fraction U(IV)
                 0.5


                 0.4


                 0.3


                 0.2


                 0.1


                  0
                       -400     -300     -200           -100         0              100             200
                                                 Eh (mV)

 Figure R-9. Theoretical redox transition zone for U (blue shaded region) compared with redox conditions
 in SR-Site temperate case at 9,000 y (dark green and dark red shaded region) which encompasses the
 potential span of both Fe(OH)3 and FeSam redox cases. The green and red shaded areas represent fully
 reducing (100% U(IV)) and fully oxidising (100% U(VI)) conditions, respectively. The cross-hairs in the
 figure approximately indicate the centroid of the transition point for the application groundwater pH and
 carbonate ranges illustrated previously in Figure R-8.




 R-10-48                                                                                                  239
In the far-field, however, where U is not expected to be present in sufficiently high concentration to
buffer redox conditions, the statistics of groundwater composition imply a strong spatial variability
in redox state. In some locations, conditions might allow U(IV) to be the dominant redox state,
although in other locations U(VI) might dominate. In most cases, however, a mixed composition
of U(IV) and U(VI) can probably be expected. Since 226Ra is a prominent daughter nuclide in the
238
    U decay chain, redox speciation in the less mobile tetravalent form would constitute a more con-
centrated secondary source of 226Ra. The assumption of the least sorbing redox state for U therefore
cannot be taken to be the most pessimistic choice in safety assessment calculations. It is therefore
recommended that both redox states are propagated to SR-Site as separate case studies in order to
ascertain the consequences of this uncertainty.




240                                                                                             R-10-48
                                                                                        Appendix S

Kd data derivation sheet for zirconium (Zr)
Overview and evaluation of available literature data
The sorption of Zr(IV) on granitic rock is poorly covered in the literature and only one study /Kulmala
and Hakanen 1993/ has been found where sorption has been characterised in sufficient detail to be
deemed qualified. An earlier study by /Allard et al. 1979/ is acknowledged although, on account of
the small number of measurements and because no BET surface areas were reported, the results are
considered less useful for extrapolation using the methodology outlined in this report.
It is noted that although BET surface area data were not actually recorded by /Kulmala and Hakanen
1993/, data are available in a later reference for crushed samples of the same rock type taken from
the same site. In the study by /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/, sorption was measured on a single size
fraction of tonalite (Olkiluoto, Finland) crushed to a particle size specified as less than 3 mm. The
BET data reported in /Huitti et al. 1998/ for similar materials are, however, for a size fraction speci-
fied as less than 2 mm. In the absence of more accurate data, the BET surface area of the slightly
coarser material was assumed to be roughly the same as the crushed rock samples used by /Kulmala
and Hakanen 1993/.
The sorption experiments were carried out under oxic conditions using a natural groundwater sample
native to the site. The Olkiluoto groundwater (TVO-GW) was fresh in character with an ionic
strength of 0.017 M. Rd values and sorption percentages were estimated for contact times ranging
from 7 days to 6 months for Zr(IV) spike concentrations in the range 1.7×10–9–1.5×10–7 M and a
liquid to solid ratio of 10. The Rd data are given without error estimates. The sorption percentages,
however, are specified with uncertainty estimates. A total of 72 measurements were reported for
different contact times, spike concentrations, and separation procedures (i.e. centrifugation with and
without additional ultrafiltration). Owing to the broadly similar Rd values reported for the different
experimental conditions, the data set was considered in its entirety without any filtering.


Selection of representative data for site specific conditions
Using the procedures outlined in Appendix C, the Rd values and their error estimates were
recalculated from the raw data in /Kulmala and Hakanen 1993/. The individual Rd values and their
uncertainties were then re-sampled assuming a convex combination of the underlying uncertainty
distributions. The composite distribution of Rd values thus obtained is shown in Figure S-1.
The BET surface area of the crushed tonalite was reported as 0.28±0.04 m2/g. The mechanical
damage transfer factor, fm was therefore estimated to be:
log10 fm ≈ –1.23±0.26								                                                             (S-1)
No CEC data are given for the tonalite used in the experiments, although the biotite content has been
estimated to be roughly 6.6% by volume by /Huitti et al. 1998/. Since Forsmark metagranite has a
biotite content of roughly 5.4% by volume /Sandström and Stephens 2009/, the CEC transfer factor,
fcec is assumed to be approximately unity given that the CEC can only be guessed very approximately.
Although there is no evidence to suggest for, or against preferential sorption of Zr(IV) in association
with biotite, its general insensitivity to groundwater redox conditions would suggest that CEC effects
can possibly be neglected in any case.


Recommended Kd data for SR-Site application conditions
Estimated K 0d values were calculated for Forsmark metagranite using the mechanical damage transfer
factor only (fcec is neglected). If it is furthermore assumed that the principal uncertainties relating to
variable groundwater composition are internalised in the data, this data can be deemed suitable for
SR-Site application conditions. The recommended Kd range for use in SR-Site transport calculations
is given in Figure S-2.




R-10-48                                                                                                241
                1
                           Tonalite + TVO_GW (Fresh groundwater)
               0.9

               0.8

               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6

               0.5

               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1

                0
               1.00E-02                      1.00E-01                    1.00E+00     1.00E+01
                                                        Rd0 (m3/kg)

 Figure S-1. Rd (m3/kg) values calculated for Zr(IV) sorption based on literature Rd data and presented as
 an empirical cumulative distribution function for tonalite (Olkiluoto, Finland) in contact with a groundwater
 characterised as fresh.


                 1
                          Tonalite + TVO_GW (Fresh groundwater)
               0.9        lognormal fit to data

               0.8

               0.7




CDF (% rank)
               0.6

               0.5
                                                            log10 Kd = -1.67±0.35
               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1

                0
               1.00E-03                      1.00E-02                     1.00E-01    1.00E+00
                                                        Kd (m3/kg)

 Figure S-2. Recommended Kd (m3/kg) values for Zr(IV) sorption for use in SR-Site calculations. The data
 range is considered to be applicable to all groundwater compositions and assumes Forsmark metagranite
 (SKB rock code 101057) as a representative rock type. The parameters of the lognormal distribution fit to
 the data are indicated in the figure.




 242                                                                                                    R-10-48
